13
Alpha and Risk Factors
By Peng Wan
In this chapter, we will review the practice of seeking alphas from a historical perspective. We will examine a few well-studied alphas and observe that some evolve to become “hedge fund betas,” or risk factors.
Building on Markowitz's work (1952) on the expected returns and variance of returns of a portfolio, Treynor (1962), Sharpe (1964), Lintner (1965), and Mossin (1966) developed the capital asset pricing model (CAPM) in the 1960s. According to CAPM, a stock's expected return is the investor's reward for the stock's market risk:
Expected return = Risk-free rate + Stock's market beta * Market risk premium
Since its birth, CAPM has been challenged for its restrictive assumptions and inconsistency with empirical data. The arbitrage pricing theory (APT), developed chiefly by Ross (1976), does not require the stringent assumptions of CAPM. APT states that in a market with perfect competition, a stock's expected return is a linear function of its sensitivities to multiple unspecified factors:
Expected return = Risk-free rate + Σ(Stock's factor beta * Factor's risk premium)
CAPM and APT provided the theoretical foundation of stock return analysis and alpha evaluation. In practice, the factors in APT can be constructed as stock portfolios, and most of them can be constructed as both dollar-neutral and market-beta-neutral portfolios. Each of these beta-dollar-neutral factors can be evaluated as a potentially tradable alpha.
In the 1980s, several important factors were reported. Banz (1981) documented the size factor, which says that small-cap stocks tend to outperform large-cap stocks. Basu (1983), as well as Rosenberg et al. (1985), published various forms of the value factor, including earnings to price ratio (E/P) and book equity to market equity (BE/ME). Fama and French (1992, 1993) analyzed multiple documented factors that could explain stock returns and summarized them as the Fama–French three-factor model; the model cites market risk, size, and value factors. It's worth mentioning that investment managers may have profited from these factors before academics analyzed them in a theoretical framework. For example, value investing was promoted by Benjamin Graham and David Dodd in the 1930s, well before modern portfolio theory was formulated. As another example, the Magellan Fund had high small-cap exposure in the early 1980s, when Peter Lynch was the fund's manager (Siegel et al. 2001).
The Fama–French three-factor model did not end the search for factors. Instead, in parallel with the rapid expansion of the quantitative investment industry, researchers published many more factors; Fama and French tried to absorb some of them into the Fama–French five-factor model (2015). Besides the market risk, size, and value factors, the new model added profitability and investment. The profitability factor says that stocks with more robust operating profitability, such as high gross profits to assets, have higher expected returns. The investment factor says that, all else being equal, more conservative reinvestment of company earnings (i.e. issuing dividends and/or buying back stock) implies higher expected returns of the stock.
Not absorbed into Fama and French's expanded model were a number of important factors, such as the momentum effect that recent winners tend to outperform recent losers (Jegadeesh and Titman 1993), the liquidity effect that less liquid stocks have higher expected returns (Amihud and Mendelson 1986; Pástor and Stambaugh 2003), and the accrual anomaly that higher accruals in accounting are associated with lower expected returns (Sloan 1996).
These and other well-studied risk factors have played important roles in the theory and practice of finance. Any alpha we find may unintentionally load some risk factors because they are expected to continue to drive a large portion of the relative returns of stocks in the future. For instance, a raw alpha built from news sentiment may load the momentum factor because news writers get excited by high-flying stocks, even if the alpha construction does not involve any of the price information from which the original momentum factor was built.
It is hard to tell whether each factor is the result of irrational investor behavior or the reward for bearing some systematic risk. For practitioners, it may be more important to know whether these factors' risk premiums will persist in the future. Unfortunately, this is also hard to predict, but we might get some insights from the adaptive market hypothesis (AMH), which was proposed by Andrew Lo (2004) to reconcile financial theories based on the efficient market hypothesis with behavioral economics. AMH does not view the market as being in equilibrium. Instead, it tries to explain market dynamics by evolutionary processes. It compares profit opportunities in the market to food and water in a local ecology, for which different species compete. Drawing insights from evolutionary processes, AMH predicts that the risks and rewards of market opportunities are unlikely to be stable over time and that investment strategies may wax and wane. Opportunities may disappear, then reappear years later. Lo's hypothesis implies that in a competitive environment the best opportunities are likely to be available for only a short time before other “animals” find them. In the adaptive market, the wide publication of these factors could change their behavior in the future because market participants would act on the newly broadcast information.
As an example, Figure 13.1 shows the long-term cumulative return of a value factor. (The factor is constructed by shorting the bottom 30% of US stocks ranked by BE/ME and buying the top 30% ranked by BE/ME. The monthly return series were downloaded from Kenneth French's website, http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html#Research.) The factor achieved positive returns over the long term but occasionally suffered big losses, including after the late 1990s tech bubble and during the 2008 financial crisis. Another observation is that the annualized Sharpe ratio was 0.56 between 1950 and 1989 but only 0.11 between 1990 and 2017; this may be a sign that the wide publication of the factor changed its behavior.
Figure 13.1 Long-term cumulative return of a value factor (1950–2017)
In our research process, we need to be aware of a few issues concerning these risk factors:
• As we have discussed, their Sharpe ratios cannot be high, given how well known they are. Smart money could quickly pile in until the performance became less attractive.
• Some of these risk factors, such as size and liquidity, require a large imbalance of liquidity between the long and short sides of factor expression. This is not desirable in actual trading and is also a concern for risk management because it would be difficult to liquidate both sides in a balanced way, particularly under market crisis conditions.
• These risk factors generally realize higher volatility per dollar size. They may suffer long-term drawdowns as a result of macro trends. Moreover, there is a trend in the industry to package some of these risk factors as alternative beta products, which may increase their volatility in the future. Figure 13.2 shows the long drawdown caused by the market reversal in 2009 of a momentum factor, as calculated by French and his team.
Figure 13.2 Cumulative return of a momentum factor (2008–2012)
• The well-studied risk factors are popularly implemented by many firms across the quant investment industry. If some large holders suddenly deleverage their holdings, the price impact may be high enough to force others to follow and thus exacerbate the losses. This danger was most vividly demonstrated in the August 2007 “quant crisis”: popular quant risk factors suffered large losses, most likely as a result of some large players' aggressive unwinding (Khandani and Lo 2007). Figure 13.3 shows the sudden loss of a hypothetical quant factor during the 2007 crisis. The factor is constructed by combining the momentum and value factors. The daily return series for the construction were downloaded from French's website, and the combo factor is leveraged to target 10% annualized volatility. The way to avoid this kind of catastrophic risk is to be different from others and to control the exposure to common risk factors.
Figure 13.3 Cumulative return of a hypothetical factor during the 2007 quant crisis
Therefore, even though these well-studied market effects may continue to generate positive returns in the long run (for either rational risk-rewarding reasons or irrational investor behavioral reasons), we tend to call them hedge fund betas, or risk factors, rather than alphas in our research process.
From a historical perspective, there is not a clear distinction between alphas and hedge fund betas. The transition has been part of the evolving process of the adaptive market. In the era of CAPM, any market anomalies, such as the size and value factors, might have been considered alphas. After the Fama–French three-factor model was widely adopted, the momentum factor was still an alpha. Nowadays, however, more “alphas” have evolved to become hedge fund betas, or risk factors.
In the process of new alpha research, it is better to avoid high loadings of risk factors. We can evaluate the strength of an alpha by neutralizing these factors. The most common way is to perform a multivariate regression on the alpha portfolio against the risk factor portfolios. A good alpha tends to yield a higher Sharpe ratio after risk factor neutralization, even though its per-dollar return may be reduced in some cases. As an example, Table 13.1 shows the impact of this factor neutralization process on a hypothetical alpha built with Bloomberg price–volume data for 3,000 stocks traded in the US. The alpha is constructed as a dollar-neutral long–short portfolio of fixed size, for the period from January 2011 to December 2016. Before factor neutralization, the original alpha had an annualized average return of 16.8% (relative to the long-side size of the alpha) and an annualized Sharpe ratio of 1.55. We performed factor neutralization with three Barra USE3S (a US equity risk model) risk factors: momentum, size, and value. After each operation, the per-dollar return was lower and the Sharpe ratio was higher. The Sharpe ratio was highest after simultaneous neutralization of the three factors.
Table 13.1 Example of factor neutralization on an alpha
Annualized return Annualized volatility Sharpe ratio
Original alpha 16.8% 10.9% 1.55
Neutralized momentum factor 13.3% 7.4% 1.79
Neutralized size factor 14.4% 8.1% 1.77
Neutralized value factor 14.6% 8.1% 1.81
Neutralized all three factors 13.4% 7.3% 1.84
In summary, finding alphas is a constantly evolving process in a competitive market. Some alphas may become less powerful over the years. Because of the risks involved, it is wise to avoid high loadings of risk factors in our portfolios. As predicted by the AMH, innovation is the key to survival.