21
Introduction to Momentum Alphas
By Zhiyu Ma Arpit Agarwal, and and Laszlo Borda
In financial markets, “momentum” refers to the empirical observation that asset prices that have been rising are likely to rise further, and vice versa. Within the framework of the efficient market hypothesis, momentum is one of the market anomalies (along with reversion, seasonality, and momentum reversal) that originate from the fact that investors' immediate reactions may be improper and will tend to adjust over time.
In a seminal 1993 paper, Jegadeesh and Titman found that the winners and losers in the past 3–12 months are likely to continue to win and lose. The same phenomenon has been extensively studied, and it has been confirmed that momentum works for most asset classes and financial markets around the world (Chan et al. 2000; Hong and Stein 1999; Hong et al. 2000; Jegadeesh and Titman 2001, 2011; Rouwenhorst 1998). The observed profitability of momentum alphas, however, has shrunk a great deal in recent years, and they suffered a large drawdown during and around the financial crisis of 2008 (Barroso and Santa-Clara 2015). Since then, many research papers have suggested modifying the rule to enhance the potential profit and reduce the potential drawdown while keeping the spirit of a momentum alpha (Antonacci 2014). This continues to be an active field of research within the academic community.
Researchers have attempted to explain through behavioral models why momentum alphas work. According to a well-accepted theory of conservatism bias, investors tend to underreact to new information (Barberis et al. 1998; Chan et al. 1996; Daniel et al. 1998; Edwards 1968; Zhang 2006). In an imperfectly efficient market, it takes time to resolve and price new information. This explanation seems to hold water when we investigate the impact of events on the markets. The stock price gains momentum when public information is announced (for example, earnings announcements); the more powerful the information, the stronger the momentum effect. An interesting observation is that stock momentum actually starts to build up before the announcement is made (that is, when the public information was private information), indicating that investors' expectations, guided by analysts' recommendations and forecasts, also play a role in the momentum effect. Another class of momentum alphas may be based on identifying events using news, earning announcements, or any other quantitative formulation and then defining alphas based on the stock returns preceding the event.
Not only do investors underreact to new information – stock analysts do, too. Under peer pressure, analysts are reluctant to make outstanding (but possibly correct) forecasts; instead, they tend to gradually adjust their forecasts on future earnings and target prices. Consequently, when investors in the market make investment decisions based on analysts' recommendations, the overall decision itself is an underreaction; this provides a supplementary explanation of the price momentum effect. As per a contrarian theory of delayed overreaction, abnormal momentum returns in the holding period are expected to be followed by negative returns because of the subsequent reversal when the stock prices eventually return to their fundamental values. Daniel et al. (1998) and Hong and Stein (1999) have proposed alternative models that are consistent with short-term momentum and long-term reversals.
An alternative (or supplementary) hypothesis assumes that momentum investors bear significant risk for betting on the strategy and that the higher returns they accrue are a compensation for the risk (Li et al. 2008). Momentum strategies implemented on stocks with high bid–ask spreads (thereby exhibiting exposure to illiquidity risk) provide strong returns (Lesmond et al. 2004). It is therefore crucial to take transaction costs into account when evaluating the potential profitability of a momentum strategy. The returns associated with a momentum strategy implemented on stocks with relatively low analyst coverage are very strong, as the slower dissemination of public information increases the momentum profits (Hong and Stein 1999; Hong et al. 2000). Momentum profits have been observed to be significantly higher when the strategies are implemented on growth stocks (low book-to-market) compared with value stocks (high book-to-market), most likely because growth stocks are harder to evaluate than value stocks (Daniel and Titman 1999). A somewhat contrarian and surprising finding suggests that momentum profits are higher for stocks with higher volumes (Lee and Swaminathan 2000). High-volume stocks typically generate more public information and can be traded more easily with lower transaction costs; a potential explanation is that the large difference in opinion about higher turnover may arise from difficulties in evaluating the fundamental values of these stocks.
It is important to mention here that other alpha signals in their most basic form may contain significant exposure to the price momentum factor. In some of these cases, momentum represents an unintended source of risk, which can be minimized by neutralizing the basic signal to the momentum factor. In other cases – seasonality, for example – momentum contributes significantly to the strategy's return, so momentum neutralization is not an option. For more details on momentum as a risk factor, see Chapter 13.
Seasonal effects potentially impact the performance of the momentum strategy: the average monthly returns to the momentum strategy corresponding to quarter-ending months have been found to be significantly higher than the returns corresponding to non-quarter-ending months. This pattern is stronger for stocks with high levels of institutional trading, suggesting that “window dressing” (selling recent losers and buying recent winners at the end of the reporting period) by institutional investors and tax-loss selling contribute to stock return momentum (Gray 2015).
Another approach to developing momentum alphas is based on the momentum exhibited by macroeconomic factors. In arbitrage pricing theory, the returns of a stock or other financial asset can be modeled as a linear function by a much smaller set of macroeconomic factors or theoretical market indexes. The exposures of stocks to the various factors are dynamic and constantly changing. Yet when compared with single-stock returns, single-factor returns are much more stable and exhibit stronger momentum characteristics (at least, over a given period of time or market state). Alphas based on factor regressions therefore assume that the factors' returns have a momentum effect. Another application of factor momentum is to trade the factors that the market currently favors by reverse-engineering the factors in which mutual fund managers are currently investing.
Another approach for developing momentum alphas is based on group momentum, which often is associated with a phenomenon called co-movement. Related stocks – stocks of companies that are in comparable areas of business or share similar exposures to a common factor that significantly explains their returns – tend to move together. Moskowitz and Grinblatt (1999) evaluated momentum in industry returns by forming industry portfolios with stocks ranked based on their industry returns. They found that stocks with high industry returns outperformed the low-industry-return stocks in the six-month period following portfolio formation. The extent to which industry momentum contributes to momentum profits was re-examined by Grundy and Martin (2001). Momentum profits also can arise from lead–lag effects because the stocks in the group do not move by exactly the same amount at the same time. Usually, a few leaders in the group move first (possibly driven by new information or by reacting to the common factors early), then other stocks in the group follow the leaders. The lagged stocks enjoy the momentum profits, as investors can seek to anticipate their future price movements based on the movement of the leaders and the common factor realizations. In addition to directly related stocks, there are related groups (for example, industries on a common supply chain), which transfer returns from one leading group to the others.
CONCLUSION
When any predictable patterns in returns are identified, investors act quickly to exploit them until the predictability is eliminated. However, based on the observed positive returns that momentum alphas have generated across major markets around the world, it can be argued that momentum effects represent the strongest evidence against the efficient market hypothesis. For the same reasons, momentum has attracted and will continue to attract substantial research; financial economists have not yet reached a consensus on what generates momentum profits. Indeed, as momentum effects are evidence of market inefficiency, attempts have been made to provide behavioral explanations for the phenomenon. Developing momentum alphas on liquid universes (sets of more efficient stocks) is a particular challenge, which requires deeper exploration.