10
Controlling Biases
By Anand Iyer and and Aditya Prakash
INTRODUCTION
Investment biases have been well-studied, as is clear from both the academic literature and the field of behavioral finance, which is dedicated to understanding them. Although a quantitative investment process offers investors a means of managing and arbitraging such biases, many quantitative portfolio managers wind up introducing bias, systematically or otherwise. This chapter is a practitioner's reflection on how to control bias and is aimed at quantitative portfolio managers and researchers.
We start by identifying two categories of bias, then explore various types of bias that exist within these categories. We conclude with some practical suggestions for quantitative practitioners and firms.
CATEGORIES OF BIAS
We broadly categorize bias as systematic or behavioral. Investors introduce systematic bias by inadvertently coding it into their quantitative processes. By contrast, investors introduce behavioral bias by making ad hoc decisions rooted in their own human behavior. Over a period of time, both systematic and behavioral bias yield suboptimal investment outcomes.
SYSTEMATIC BIASES
There are two important sources of systematic bias: look-ahead bias and data mining.
Look-Ahead Bias
In a simulation or backtest, when a signal or investment strategy at a given point in time uses data from a future point that would not have been known or available, it introduces look-ahead bias. This often makes the simulation results
appear better than they actually are. Although it is well understood, look-ahead bias is surprisingly prevalent in the quantitative arena.
Look-Ahead Bias in Timestamping
One of the key causes of look-ahead bias is poor timestamping of data. Every datum should be dual timestamped with the occurrence datetime and the arrival datetime. The occurrence datetime identifies when the event associated with the data occurred. For example:
Analyst XYZ upgraded stock PQR to a buy on 20171017 10:00:00 EST
The arrival datetime is when the researcher received the information of the aforementioned event from the data distributor or vendor. For example:
Vendor ABC delivered information of the above analyst upgrade on 20171018 15:00:00 EST
Any signal keyed off the occurrence datetime instead of the arrival datetime will ignore the real-world delays associated with getting the data, which may result in unrealistic simulations.
In quantitative parlance, dual-timestamped data is also called point-in-time data. Many time series, such as GDP estimates, are subject to frequent revisions by the economists gathering and analyzing the data. Data vendors may also correct data errors over a period of time. In all such cases, dual timestamping reconstructs the data available at a point in time so that an accurate simulation may be conducted for that point in time.
Another form of poor timestamping relevant to global strategies is the failure to record the time zone in which the data is timestamped. This is especially relevant for strategies
that trade different time zones simultaneously – for example, London and New York. Simulations of signals that trade simultaneously across different time zones can be accurately reconstructed by normalizing the data datetimes across time zones to a single time zone.
Last, quantitative portfolio managers rely on data vendors. Any look-ahead bias introduced in the vendor's own data collection and dissemination process can make it into an investment model. Therefore, quantitative investors should accept only historical data that is dual timestamped and thoroughly vet any data source that is subject to frequent revisions. Models should be tested for consistency between the vendor's in-sample period (before it began delivering the data in real time) and the subsequent out-of-sample period.
Look-Ahead Bias in Machine Learning
Researchers using machine learning techniques also can introduce look-ahead bias. In particular, they may tune some hyper-parameters on the entire data sample and then use those parameters in the backtest. Hyper-parameters should always be tuned using only backward-looking data. Similarly, in the area of sentiment analysis, researchers should take note of vendor-supplied sentiment dictionaries that may have been trained on forward-looking data.
Data Mining
A researcher may data mine a signal by tinkering with its construction until it has favorable in-sample performance; this is commonly called overfitting. The standard approach to controlling data mining involves a holdout, which withholds data in the simulation and takes one of two broad forms: a time-series holdout or an asset holdout. In a time-series holdout, researchers do not conduct the backtest on a given section of time. Similarly, in an asset holdout researchers do not conduct the backtest on a certain set of assets. After the
holdout is incorporated into the backtest, a separate backtest is conducted solely on the holdout to validate whether the performance is consistent.
There are two common approaches when using a time-series holdout:
1. Omit a continuous stretch of time. Typically, this is toward the end of the time series.
2. Hold out several interleaved stretches of time within the entire backtesting window. For example, hold out periods every alternate week within that window. When using interleaving, we need to ensure that any seasonality or autocorrelations in the data do not bias our results.
For an asset holdout, we have to make sure that the holdout sample of assets has the same broad characteristics as the overall asset universe. There should be no country, industry, size, or liquidity bias in the holdout relative to the overall asset universe. The holdout sample should be relatively independent of the other assets; if they are highly correlated, the holdout is of limited value.
Data mining carries the risk of formulation bias, which relates to the choice of which signal formulation to use on the same set of data. For example, should a momentum signal consume 3, 6, or 12 months of price returns data? Should a signal that consumes historical trading volume data use mean historical volume or its root-mean-squared historical volume? Although signal characteristics such as turnover and an in-sample Sharpe ratio can help drive formulation decisions, it is hard to tell which formula will work best out of sample. One mitigating approach is to diversify across formulations by mixing them using some unbiased weighting scheme, such as equal weighting or risk parity weighting.
BEHAVIORAL BIASES
There are several behavioral traps that are germane to the
quantitative investment space, as detailed below.
Storytelling
Quantitative researchers and portfolio managers are at risk of storytelling, the tendency to fit an unverifiable story to justify performance. A researcher may explain the sensibility of a signal based on a theory – a phenomenon called theory-fitting. A researcher may also make a claim that is correct for a given sample window but falls apart outside that window – say, that mean-reversion signals don't work for French stocks. Similarly, portfolio managers may attempt to explain portfolio drawdowns based on redemption flows among correlated managers without rigorously validating this hypothesis. If they reshape their portfolios based on a biased story, they simply incur additional costs and degrade investment performance.
Confirmation Bias
Confirmation bias is the tendency to believe information that aligns with the practitioner's prior probability distribution and to disbelieve its opposite. The availability of unverifiable information on the internet to support almost any set of priors makes it easy to fall prey to this bias. For quantitative researchers, a classic trap is the fallacy that the latest research is the greatest. Buzzwords, especially those espoused by the larger investment community, also feed confirmation biases.
Familiarity Bias
Familiarity bias is the tendency to invest in familiar assets. Research shows that individual investors have a tendency to invest in companies with geographical proximity. For example, an investor is more likely to invest in technology stocks if she is based in Silicon Valley. Though this goes against the grain of the quantitative investment approach, which is grounded in diversification, quantitative investors
may unknowingly introduce this bias into their models. Many practitioners construct universes using the familiar S&P 500 constituents instead of a broader universe of potentially unfamiliar names. Another form of familiarity bias is to pursue exclusively a certain style of signals, such as statistical arbitrage, factor- and event-driven strategies, and so forth.
Narrow Framing
Narrow framing is the tendency to make investment decisions without considering the larger portfolio. One example is a portfolio manager who shifts capital allocations without considering overall correlations and associated costs. Another example is a portfolio manager who changes models amid, and in response to, a drawdown.
Availability Bias
Availability bias is the tendency to judge a future event as more likely given a recent memory of a similar event. Consider the portfolio manager who, on the eve of the U.K.'s Brexit vote, surmised that Brexit would not happen because Greece's Grexit never did. Similarly, a quantitative investor may overallocate to a strategy based on its recent outperformance.
Herding Bias
Herding is the propensity of investors to crowd into the same positions and has been identified as a key driver of financial bubbles. Quantitative investors in particular are known to have high correlation with one another, suggesting that herding bias may be incorporated in their models. This likely happens because many investors use similar data sources to construct similar investment strategies inspired by the same academic research. Although it is easier said than done, the best way to guard against this bias is to have differentiating investment research.
CONCLUSION
Biases, while impossible to eliminate, can be better controlled
by personal awareness. Portfolio managers should control their behavioral biases by committing to reduce ad hoc intervention, especially amid drawdowns, when the tendency to act on a bias is most pronounced. Writing up a drawdown playbook beforehand can be an effective solution. Similarly, researchers need to restrain behavioral biases around their own recent work. Containing systematic biases, by contrast, requires a sustained commitment of time and technological sophistication to ferret out look-ahead bias and overfitting.
