14
Risk and Drawdowns
By Hammad Khan and and Rebecca Lehman
Finding alphas is all about returns over risk. Everyone knows what returns are, but what is risk? Researchers often conflate different types of risk, which require different forms of measurement and control. In truth, the set of potential types of risk is unbounded. At the far end are Knightian uncertainty and black swans – risks that are a priori unknowable but can be rationalized and overfit after the fact. The only constructive thing that can be said about these risks is that they exist and any attempt to rationalize them after they have occurred is an exercise in futility. Overly complex risk models may contain epicycles upon epicycles that are intended to mitigate the last black swan event but will do nothing for the next one except make the models more brittle. Slightly closer to home are asset-specific and operational risks, which the practitioner can and should take into account but are not amenable to a broad treatment. This chapter will focus on the near end of the risk spectrum – the most well defined and commonly considered types, which can be broadly classified as extrinsic and intrinsic risks.
Many alphas are exposed to extrinsic, or external, factors that are not related to their source of returns, such as the behavior of a given industry or the market as a whole. Other risk factors include alpha strategies that have been largely arbitraged away but are still highly traded and prone to momentum periods and liquidation runs, such as the Fama–French and Barra factors. These factors constitute extrinsic risk to the alpha, which can be partially or completely neutralized without destroying performance. One special type of external danger is event risk, when the usual drivers of an alpha's performance are temporarily outweighed by some external factor, such as a sudden news announcement, which may or may not be anticipated. But even after neutralizing all known external factors, an alpha still contains its own intrinsic risk, and that is what ultimately drives its return, assuming limits to arbitrage. Although intrinsic risk cannot be eliminated, it can and should be estimated and controlled.
Different measures of intrinsic risk – such as volatility, value at risk, and expected tail loss – can be used to select the appropriate level of leverage or capital allocation for each alpha. One type of intrinsic risk that is particularly challenging to estimate is drawdown risk. For many investors, drawdowns are critical – perhaps even more important than historical volatility – because excessive drawdowns pose a risk to their firms' continued operations. Drawdowns are particularly difficult to estimate empirically because they are nonlinear and more likely to be overfit in sample than other risk measures, such as volatility and value at risk. Because of their practical importance, however, it is worth discussing some techniques for predicting and controlling them.
ESTIMATING RISKS
Position-Based Measures
The simplest and perhaps most robust risk estimates for an alpha are based on its current positions. These are easy to compute and do not rely on any assumptions about the alpha's future behavior, but they tend to be brittle and measure only extreme risk. The extrinsic risks associated with concentration in a particular security, group of correlated securities, or factor quantiles can be measured by position concentrations. Excessive concentration is a risk, as the alpha can expect severe losses if its prediction for the returns of the highly concentrated position is wrong.
The risk associated with a factor, given in the form of an alpha vector, can be estimated by the orthogonal projection of the alpha onto that vector. If a news event is expected to affect a certain set of instruments, the event risk can be measured as the exposure to those instruments. Another position-based approach to factor risk is to run a regression of the historical returns of the given positions against the historical returns of the factors. The beta coefficients, or factor loadings, define the risk associated with those positions.
The intrinsic value at risk of a given set of positions is simply the p percentile loss in the returns distribution of the given set of positions (usually p = 5% or 10%), and the expected tail loss is the average loss, conditional on being below the p percentile. It is possible to calculate the value at risk of each individual position (making no assumptions about the correlation between positions) and of the overall portfolio (making the implicit assumption that the correlation structure of the instruments is stable).
Historical PnL-Based Measures
A smoother risk estimate can often be obtained by looking at the performance of an alpha's historical positions rather than just its present set of positions. This makes the assumption that the alpha's positions are adapted to the current environment. Because the historical PnL series changes only slowly over time, these measures are smoother and can be more easily controlled without causing excessive churn, but they may be slow to detect changes in the alpha's risk profile or environment. One way to detect extrinsic risks is to consider the PnL concentration in certain sectors. Even if the positions do not appear to be concentrated, if the PnL is highly concentrated in certain sectors, the other sectors are not contributing to the diversification of the alpha. See Figure 14.1 for an example.
Figure 14.1 Example of an equities alpha whose performance is primarily driven only by the energy and information technology sectors
Though its overall in-sample performance may look very reasonable, this alpha's performance may degrade rapidly if there is a regime change in either of the two key sectors. A more robust alpha should have its performance equally distributed across as many sectors (and securities within those sectors) as possible, unless there is a good reason not to. If the nature of the data or the idea is such that it can be expected to work on only a few sectors, it is generally better to restrict the alpha to these sectors in advance, before testing it, and to control the alpha's high risk by imposing sizing constraints according to the number of instruments. Assigning weight to groups of instruments that do not produce consistent returns is a waste of capital, but throwing them out after seeing their performance raises the risk of survivor bias.
Figure 14.2 shows a reasonable target distribution. Achieving perfect parity among sectors is unrealistic, but in this case the alpha is significantly positive on all sectors.
Figure 14.2 Example of an equities alpha whose performance is reasonably distributed across all sectors
Similarly, a researcher should check the distribution of an alpha's performance relative to extreme alpha values. An easy way to test for this is to divide the alpha values into quintiles and find the mean (and standard deviation) or returns coming from each quintile. In an ideal alpha (Figure 14.3), the top quintile (highly positive alpha values, if the alpha is centered around 0) yields highly positive future returns and the bottom quintile (highly negative alpha values) yields highly negative future returns.
Figure 14.3 The desired quintile distribution of an alpha
In practice, many alphas derive almost all of their performance from just the top or the bottom quintile, and quintiles 2 to 4 are simply noise, as in Figure 14.4.
Figure 14.4 A quintile distribution where only the tails of the alpha have predictive power
Because such alphas have good predictive power only in tail cases, the actual breadth of performance decreases and the chances of a drawdown increase if the tail information is degraded in the future. Because there's no information in the central quintiles of such alphas, it makes sense to throw out those instruments where the absolute value is below some noise threshold. However, because the result is an alpha that trades a smaller number of instruments, we can expect it to have higher volatility and lower robustness than the ideal one in the event of a single-instrument shock.
In other cases (as in Figure 14.5), the strongest tail values do not work. The low predictive power of the strongest signals implies that the alpha may not be robust. The researcher should probably investigate the alpha further and either refine the hypothesis or throw it out.
Figure 14.5 An alpha that is not robust
PnL-based factor risks can be estimated by examining the distribution of returns over factor quantiles or by regressing the actual historical returns of the alpha against the historical returns of the chosen risk factors. An alpha's intrinsic risk can also be measured as the annualized volatility, value at risk, or maximum drawdown of the actual historical PnL series rather than the current position. It is important to consider the time scales on which to measure both extrinsic and intrinsic risk measures. A narrower window or a faster decay factor makes the risk measure more responsive to regime changes at the cost of historical memory. It is also important to consider the time structure of the alpha when choosing these parameters. If the alpha changes its positions quickly, it is more likely changing its risk exposures quickly, so a narrower time window makes sense. If the alpha has a natural periodicity (e.g. seasonality for an agricultural commodities alpha), risk measures on fractions of that period will tend to be noisy, so all windows should be multiples of the period. It is generally worthwhile to combine estimates on shorter and longer time horizons for added robustness and as a safeguard in case the basic time structure of the alpha breaks down.
DRAWDOWNS
A drawdown is the percentage loss of an alpha from its previous high value. For example, if an alpha has made 20% returns since inception and then drops in the next few days (or weeks) to an 18% return, the drawdown is measured as 2%. Because no alpha makes money every day, every alpha has drawdowns.
Investors generally have to worry about two features of drawdowns:
• The largest drawdown the alpha has had throughout its history (and in each year of its history).
• The duration of the longest drawdown.
An excessively steep or long drawdown can bankrupt an individual investor or lead to capital flight from a fund, so it is very important to control drawdowns.
When investigating a backtest result, an alpha's drawdowns should be measured in relation to its other features – for example, its annualized return and information ratio. The annual returns should outweigh the drawdowns. Sometimes an otherwise solid alpha has a sudden sharp drawdown, then returns to its previously consistent performance. In other cases, drawdowns consist of slow and steady negative performance for many days before the alpha starts performing again. Of course, when performance turns negative in a real alpha deployment or an out-of-sample test, it is impossible to know in real time whether the alpha has stopped working altogether or just hit a temporary drawdown from which it should recover promptly. Hence, it is important to measure the depth and duration of the historical drawdowns in the in-sample period. This provides us with a benchmark against which we can measure the performance out of sample and in live trading.
Unfortunately, because they are rare, drawdowns are also easily overfit. It is easy to “fight the last battle” and come up with a clever idea that would have prevented the large drawdown seen in the backtest but do nothing to prevent the next drawdown in live trading. One useful tactic for measuring drawdown risk is bootstrapping. It works as follows:
1. Measure the autocorrelations of the alpha's PnL. Bootstrapping makes sense when there is only a finite set of significant autocorrelations.
2. Create 1,000 synthetic 10-year PnLs by randomly selecting PnL snippets of lengths equal to the autocorrelation periods (with replacement).
3. Plot the distribution of the max drawdowns of the synthetic PnLs. The 90th percentile is the bootstrapped drawdown.
Bootstrapping is useful because while it is easy to tell a plausible story about the particular market conditions that caused a drawdown and simply overfit to cut risk under those conditions, it is much harder to overfit the entire return distribution and autocorrelation structure. If the realized drawdown decreases but the bootstrapped drawdown does not, the risk has not been controlled, only masked. If the bootstrapped drawdown is controlled, it is safer to believe that the underlying distribution will not produce extreme drawdowns.
CONTROLLING RISKS
Diversify When Possible
Because different instruments are exposed to different types of risk and volatility scales like the square root of the number of independent variables, the extrinsic and intrinsic risks of an alpha or portfolio can generally be reduced by diversification, as long as the position concentrations are under control. For example, alphas constructed only on the FTSE 100 have lower diversification than alphas constructed on the entire set of UK and European stocks. Diversification can include new instruments, new regions or sectors, and new asset classes. The lower the correlations between the instruments, the better the risk approximates the ideal central limit theorem. However, there are limits to diversification. If the instruments are too diverse, the volatilities may be too heterogeneous to allow all the instruments to contribute meaningfully without excessive concentration risk, or the instruments may simply behave too differently for the same alpha ideas to be relevant. Moreover, as the underlying universe expands, other risks can come into play, such as country and currency exposure, political risk, and counterparty risk. These risks should be considered and mitigated.
Reducing Extrinsic Risks
Extrinsic risks can be controlled by neutralization or hedging. Hard neutralization consists of forcing the given risk to zero. In the case of position concentration, this can be easily achieved (assuming there are no constraints on short positions) by subtracting the group mean from the individual positions, by orthogonalizing the position vector to the factor vector, or by subtracting beta times the factor. Dollar-neutral or industry-neutral positions are achieved by hard neutralization. Soft neutralization consists of capping the exposure to the given risk, either by subtracting a portion of the exposure or by using a constrained optimization method to produce the positions.
Hedging consists of using one instrument or set of instruments as a hedge against the risk incurred by other instruments or sets of instruments. For instance, one can hedge the market beta of an equity portfolio via S&P 500 futures or exchange-traded funds, or the currency risk of a global bond portfolio via currency spots or futures. The resulting risk control is not perfect, as the hedge is imperfectly correlated with the underlying risk, but it is often useful in cases where neutralization is impractical, such as when shorting is impossible or excessively costly, or the risk is a short-term event risk and the hedge is more liquid than the underlying portfolio.
Reducing Intrinsic Risks
Intrinsic risks, as well as the extrinsic risks that remain after soft neutralization or hedging, should be controlled by dynamic position sizing. Most alphas benefit from broad caps on volatility, value at risk, expected tail loss, and position concentrations. When the risk goes up, the book size should scale down so that the alpha does not risk all of its long-term PnL on only a few high-risk days. Alphas with broad beta or risk-on/risk-off behavior can also use other relevant proxies, such as the CBOE Volatility Index, fund flows into risk-on/risk-off assets, or spikes in the correlation eigenvalues, as signals to scale their risk appetite to fit current market conditions. No single risk measure captures the full complexity of the risk profile, so it is useful to combine several relevant measures and use the most conservative one. Alphas that are highly vulnerable to certain event risks that can be known in advance (for example, central bank meetings and numbers announcements) should scale down or exit their positions in advance of the event or hedge with more-liquid instruments if they are unable to scale down in time. Stop-loss and take-profit thresholds can also be seen as examples of very short-term position-sizing constraints that cut positions after a trade has reached the expected level of risk and prevent excessive drawdowns.
Just Get Out
Not all risks can be measured or controlled. If the underlying assumptions of an alpha appear to be at risk of breaking down, the alpha cannot reasonably be expected to react. Examples of such cases include news events such as extreme natural disasters (beyond what the alpha would have seen in its backtesting period, unless the alpha is a news- or sentiment-based alpha that can be expected to exploit the event), sudden changes in the correlation structure of the underlying assets (such as the pegging or depegging of a currency), or evidence of counterparty credit risk (assuming the alpha had previously taken its counterparties for granted) – but the most important cases are the ones that nobody expected. It is the responsibility of the investor to be thoughtful in considering the alphas' failure modes and not trade them when they are likely taking unanticipated risks.
CONCLUSION
Although not all risks are knowable, some common extrinsic and intrinsic risks are worth measuring and controlling. In-sample performance charts and summary statistics reveal only part of the story. An analysis of exposures to known alpha factors, concentrations of positions and PnL, and drawdown distributions can help researchers understand the sources of risk they are taking, mitigate them where appropriate, and size them safely.