15
Alphas from Automated Search
By Yu Huang and and Varat Intaraprasornk
“Change is the only constant in life,” the Greek philosopher Heraclitus wrote some 2,500 years ago. His words are especially relevant to today's financial markets.
We live in an age of information explosion. With the exponential growth in new sources of data, it is becoming impractical to test all data manually. To tackle this problem, computer algorithms can be used to facilitate the search for alpha signals within the huge data cloud. This computer-aided method, called automated alpha search, can significantly boost the efficiency of the search for signals, producing thousands of alphas in a single day. This comes at a price: not all of the signals found are real alphas. Many of the seemingly great alpha signals discovered by automated searches are noise fitted to the in-sample historical data and have no predictive power. Thus, the focus of any automated alpha search is avoiding overfitting to improve the quality of the output signal. This chapter reviews the process of building an automated alpha search system.
EFFICIENCY AND SCALE
The main focus of an automated search is to find a large number of alpha signals from an exponentially larger number of combinations of inputs and functions. These combinations can also be recursive; combinations of combinations can generate novel alpha signals. Such complexity makes efficiency one of the foremost concerns in an automated search. This chapter presents the problems that are unique to automated alpha searches, decomposes the search process into tangible components that are similar to those in a manual alpha search, and shows how the search for efficiency governs different treatments in each area.
An automated search is subject to three problems resulting from its large scale: computational load, the inability to manually inspect every component, and lower confidence in each alpha. An automated search usually involves combining different data with different functions by trial and error. As a result, a high level of computational power is usually needed. Optimizations that reduce memory usage and improve speed can result in finding more and better alphas. The large number of combinations also means that it is impossible to inspect each of the resulting formulas by hand. Even if one wants to investigate a sample manually, the alpha expression can be very complicated and without obvious financial significance. Moreover, the sheer number of trials means that it is common for combinations that make no mathematical and economic sense to be erroneously recognized as alphas through survival bias. A good search process should reject such noise from the output or – better – should prevent it from happening in the first place. Last, the impossibility of inspecting every single alpha reduces the researcher's confidence in each alpha compared with his confidence in alphas made by hand. Therefore, new kinds of testing are required for an automated search to maintain the quality of the alphas.
To address these three concerns, researchers can investigate three main components of any alpha search (manual or automated): input data, search algorithm, and signal testing (see Figure 15.1). Input data are meaningful financial variables, such as price, earnings, and news. The goal of any signal search is to use these data to predict a target function Y, which can be the future stock returns or variants thereof. To find the relationship between the input data and the target function, a fitting algorithm is used to determine the parameters of a preselected family of trial functions f (the simplest example being the linear functions). Once the alpha is found, it is tested for robustness.
Figure 15.1 The automated search process
INPUT DATA SHOULD NOT COME FROM TOO MANY CATEGORIES
Feeding too many input variables into the fitting algorithm will lead to better in-sample fit but usually will result in worse predictive power because of overfitting. Beyond this point, one often-overlooked issue is the number of data categories. Here the category refers to the type and source of data. Some commonly explored categories include, but are not limited to, price volume, analyst ratings, fundamental data, news, and insider trading. Trying to accommodate too many variables will likely lead to an overfitted result, but fitting variables from many different categories is often worse. Data from each category has its own characteristic frequency. For example, fundamental data usually exhibits clear quarterly cycles, price–volume data is generally uniform, and insider trading filings are typically randomly spaced. If the model contains data from many different categories, it generally is more complex and more susceptible to noise in the data.
INPUT DATA AND UNITLESS RATIOS
Good stock return predictors should be homogeneous and comparable across stocks. As a result, raw financial data such as price and earnings generally are not good predictors because they are not comparable across different stocks. For example, the value of earnings is not cross-sectionally comparable, but earnings divided by revenue is. The reason is that dollar earnings depend on the size of the company. Larger companies usually have higher dollar earnings, but larger companies do not necessarily have higher stock returns. Similarly, earnings per share depend on the share size, so they also are not comparable across stocks. Earnings divided by revenue, however, show the profit margin as a percentage, so they can be compared across stocks.
Ratios of variables in the same category that are measured in the same units generally are comparable indicators. Another method is to compare the current value of a given bit of data with its historical value. For example, the current price divided by the average price over the past quarter is a unitless variable that can be compared across stocks. Note that some widely used ratios may not be good candidates for an automated search. For example, the famous P/E (share price divided by earnings per share) is not suitable for an automated search because the ratio can diverge if the value of earnings is near zero. The E/P ratio would be more suitable, as the price is never close to zero. Similarly, current earnings divided by the earnings of the previous period also can diverge.
These techniques to make comparable variables are essential in an automated search because of the researcher's inability to inspect every alpha. By using only comparable variables as inputs to the search process, it is possible to reduce the number of meaningless formulas created in the system – for example, price minus volume. This lessens the computational load by reducing irrelevant parts of the search space and improves the alpha confidence because the alphas have a higher probability of making economical and mathematical sense.
UNNECESSARY SEARCH SPACE
In a manual alpha search, it may be possible to fit a small number of parameters and trial functions by exhaustive search because the manual search space is small. This is not feasible in an automated alpha search; the computational resources required to survey the whole space would be too great in practice. Therefore, it is important to narrow down the search space as much as possible.
One possible way is to screen out combinations of functions and data that do not make sense. For example, functions such as log that cannot take a negative input value should not be matched with stock returns. Human knowledge can be used to identify and drop some less useful input data. For example, if the aim of the search is to find short-term signals, the change in slowly varying data, such as industry classification, can be omitted from the search space. Examining the coverage in time (how often the data change or become unavailable) and the coverage across stocks (how many stocks have the data available at a given time) also can help weed out less useful data. Last, an iterative search uses an initial search across a coarse grid on the parameter space to find an area with possible alphas, and follows by placing a finer grid around the area. For example, in the first round of an iterative search, a momentum formula may be fitted to the timescale of both two months and six months. If the two-month period works better, one- and three-month periods can be used in the next round. Such a method breaks the process down into smaller and faster steps. It also yields intermediate results that can be used to evolve the search process on the fly. Iterative search also can be applied to the trial functions by searching for functions of functions that create good results.
INTERMEDIATE VARIABLES
Performing a manual alpha search often reveals that an intermediate variable involving a simple function of more than one piece of basic input data can make a strong alpha. One example is the aforementioned P/E ratio, which is a composite of the price and the earnings data. An automated search also may find such useful intermediate variables, which appear in many alphas. It is possible to reduce the computational load if the search system can record these variables and reuse them in other searches. Similarly, the combinations of the trial functions can be recorded and reused. This reuse of prevalent intermediate variables is one of the bases for genetic algorithms (GAs), a full discussion of which is beyond the scope of this chapter.
SEAS OF ALPHAS, NOT SINGLE ALPHAS
In addition to the input data, the search algorithm itself can be optimized. Unlike a manual alpha search, in which the goal is usually to find the single best alpha in a small parameter space, an automated search looks for a number of good alphas in a large search space. Therefore, the algorithm should not try to find the global optimum in the search space but to find as many local optima over as large an area as possible. The ability to find a diversified set of alphas depends not only on the search algorithm but on how the search space is defined. As mentioned earlier, a researcher should filter out irrational combinations of functions and data beforehand so as to traverse only the sensible search areas. Further, by recording the most productive search areas, the researcher can concentrate the next search run on such areas to find more alphas and increase confidence, or avoid such areas to seek other undiscovered signals. The ability to find diverse alphas across the search space is one measure of how well the search algorithm and the search space are constructed.
SIMPLE ALPHAS
Because an automated search can yield a large number of alphas, a researcher may be tempted to keep increasing the complexity of the function space to obtain more alphas. Because good alphas are usually simple, this depth-based approach of making complex alphas is prone to generating a lot of noise functions that look like alphas in sample but perform badly out of sample. Therefore, the researcher should limit the depth of the search and focus more on a breadth-based approach by expanding the search space – the input data and trial functions. The quantity of the alphas found will generally grow more slowly, but the quality should be significantly higher.
LONGER BACKTESTING PERIODS
Increasing the backtesting period raises the available number of data points and increases the statistical significance of the result, but only under the assumption that the dynamics beneath the data are the same. This is not always true for financial markets. The market players and their behaviors change rapidly and in turn change the financial market dynamics. Therefore, it is a compromise when choosing the length of input data: if the period is too short, there will be less data and less confidence in the result, but if the period is too long, the shifting underlying dynamics may make the result less reliable.
In a manual search, one generally has an idea of what market dynamics are being captured and how long they are expected to persist. An automated system lacks this advantage, so one may want to consider quantitative methods for detecting when the backtesting period is too long, such as splitting the backtest and checking consistency across periods. At the cost of a modest increase in computational complexity, it may be possible to update certain parameters dynamically within the alphas rather than fitting them as part of the search, so that a longer backtesting period remains relevant.
Another concern with a longer backtesting period, especially in a large-scale search, is the higher computational load. In an iterative search, an incremental backtest period is a useful trick to take advantage of a longer backtest period without using excessive resources. For example, one starts the first round of the search with a backtest period from date M to date N. In the next round, traversing the finer grid of a smaller search space, the period of M–0.5year to N+0.5year is used. In the third round, the period of M–1year to N+1year is used, and so on. This way, the first rounds, where only a preliminary result is expected, are much faster to run, while the later rounds, where the fine-tuning occurs, use more data points for greater robustness. Extending the backtest period to each consecutive round also adds a quasi out-of-sample test at every round, allowing us to measure the yield and gain confidence in the alphas if the yield is high or abort the search if the yield is low and survivor bias is a concern.
ALPHA BATCH, NOT SINGLE ALPHA PERFORMANCE
In human research, each alpha usually is supported by economic or financial reasoning; the quality of alphas largely depends on the robustness of the parameter fitting, which is independent from one alpha to another. Therefore, the confidence of each manual alpha can be measured separately. For example, the quality can be inferred from the backtest performance or the parameter sensitivity test. By contrast, in an automated search each alpha does not have a predetermined explanation behind it, so the confidence in the alpha depends not only on the fitting algorithm but also on the search space. Therefore, it is less meaningful to ask about the quality of individual alphas than about the quality of the search as a whole. The aggregated performance of alphas made from the same search space and search algorithm is called the batch performance. This is analogous to an orchestra, whose quality is measured based on the whole ensemble, not on the music of individual performers.
Selection bias is a common pitfall, arising from an excessive focus on single alphas. After completing an automated search, it is tempting to test the out-of-sample performance of each output alpha and select only those that perform well. This practice, however, can introduce a selection bias into the alpha batch because the out-of-sample performance has been used in the alpha selection. As a result, it no longer can be considered out of sample. To alleviate this bias, consider the statistical significance of the average performance of all the alphas in the batch and decide whether to accept or reject the whole batch. For example, suppose a batch of 100 alphas is produced with a cutoff in-sample information ratio (IR) > 0.15. The alphas are tested and found to have an average out-of-sample IR = 0.01, with standard deviation of IR = 0.12. Sixty alphas have out-of-sample IR > 0 and the rest < 0. In this case, the average out-of-sample IR is too low, so all 100 alphas should be rejected, including the 60 with positive out-of-sample performance.
Studying batch statistics can help spot errors in the system that otherwise can be very hard to identify. For example, a system is set up to find low-turnover alphas using data that is updated quarterly, but the turnover of the output alpha batch is unusually high. This can point to a possible error in parameter fitting. Batch statistics also can yield useful information about the input data and trial functions; for example, the data or functions that show up many times in the alpha batch may have higher predicting power. Such insights can be used to further optimize the search space for subsequent runs.
Another application of alpha batch statistics is a technique called a yield test. If a researcher uses a set of search space (input data and functions) that makes economic or financial sense, she can expect the number of alphas found in this space to be higher than those found from a set of noisy data input or functions; that is, the good search space should have higher yield than the noisy search space. Therefore, the researcher can try feeding noise inputs into the automated search system and compare the yield and quality of the output alpha batch. The batch based on noise inputs should be worse than the batch from the supposedly good search space. If the number and quality of the alphas do not differ much regardless of whether a good or a noisy input is used, this can indicate a bad overall process, suggesting that the resulting alpha batches, even those from the clean space, are likely to be noisy.
DIVERSIFY THE ALPHA BATCH
A diversified portfolio has lower risk. This principle also can be applied to batches of alphas from different automated searches. Each alpha batch already possesses some diversification because it contains many single alphas. However, a researcher can increase diversification at the batch level by varying the set of input data (for example, fundamentals, price–volume), trial functions (linear combination, time-series regression), performance testing (maximizing returns, minimizing risk), or even the search process itself (different iterative processes). Combining alphas from many batches may further reduce the correlations among the alphas and the overall portfolio risk.
SENSITIVITY TESTS AND SIGNIFICANCE TESTS
A good alpha signal should be insensitive to noise. Cross-validation of data from different periods, from different durations, on random subsets of data, on each sector of stocks, and so forth can be a good way to mitigate the risks of overfitting, as well as the risks of noise data: we have more confidence in the signals that are less sensitive to these input changes. On the other hand, each input data field should make a significant contribution to the result. The simplest way to test significance is to remove one input variable or replace it with noise and check whether the result changes significantly. We trust the signal more if each input variable makes a significant contribution.
MANUAL ALPHA SEARCH
A high-quality alpha search requires careful handling of the input data, trial functions, search algorithm, and performance testing. It is initially difficult to pinpoint the proper choices for each of these, especially when working with a new set of input data or objective functions. Therefore, before venturing into an automated search, it is imperative to start with a manual search on the same input, because the complexity is lower and it is easier to understand all aspects of each alpha. Once the inputs are clearly understood, a researcher can generalize the process and make it suitable for an automated search.
CONCLUSION
An automated alpha search offers many advantages over a conventional manual alpha search – in particular, significant increases in efficiency and volume. The downside is that it requires caution in several areas. Automated search may exacerbate the extent of overfitting, which can be countered by careful and meaningful variable selection, input data category restriction, selection of testing periods, and sensitivity tests. These are all critical steps to avoid overfitting and generate genuine alphas. Last, by considering batch performance, improvements and diversification can be applied to the batch level; this is difficult to do with alphas obtained by manual search because of the low numbers of similar alphas and the difficulty of clustering different alphas together. With advances in the field of artificial intelligence, we expect automated alpha search to continue to grow in interest and importance.