6
Data and Alpha Design
By Weijia Li
Data plays a central role in alpha design. First, basic data, such as the price and volume of a security, is necessary to run a backtesting simulation. No matter what kind of alpha idea one wants to backtest, this basic information is required to calculate performance statistics like return, Sharpe ratio, and turnover. Without these statistics, we will never know whether an alpha idea is good. Second, data itself can inspire alpha ideas – every alpha idea is associated with some sort of data. By observing the price–volume plots of some stocks, for example, we may find repeating patterns in the history that can be used to make predictions for the future. If we also have access to company earnings data, one idea would be to trade stocks based on fluctuations in earnings.
In this chapter, we will discuss the effective use of data in alpha design. Usually, finding data is the first step in alpha research. After the data is obtained, some sanity checks should be made to verify the data's usability. Then we may start alpha research.
HOW WE FIND DATA FOR ALPHAS
Finding new data is a critical skill for an alpha researcher. We prefer alphas with good performance and low correlation; a new dataset can serve both purposes. Sometimes we can get signals from one set of data, but they may not be strong enough even after we have tried our best to improve them. If we can get another set of data and look at companies from a different angle, we may improve on the original signals. We always want to create uncorrelated alphas to diversify the alpha pool. However, even when the alpha ideas are different, signals from the same dataset may still be highly correlated. There can be an intrinsic correlation between the signals
because the same data has been used. If we have a new dataset, it will inspire new ideas and new ways of using the dataset. Ideally, the alpha signals found in the new dataset will have a low correlation to signals that are based on different types of data. By using new data, we may achieve both performance improvement and diversification.
Data from Literature
It is nice to have new data to make new alphas, but how do we get new data? There are many possible sources. The most common is academic literature. If we search for “stock returns” on the internet, we can find thousands of papers that are trying to establish ways of capturing “abnormal returns” (i.e. alphas). In those papers, we learn about the data used in their studies: price–volume, fundamentals, earnings, and so forth. Once we get that data, we can try the same methods used in the paper to develop an alpha. It is also possible to find information by scanning for publicly available content on the internet. Bear in mind that the less well known the data, the more valuable it can be. If the data is well known, many people may have similar alpha models, which can gradually arbitrage away the alpha. However, there is a possibility that even if the data is popular, no one has applied it the way we will, so it may still be useful.
Data from Vendors
Data is valuable, and providing it is a business. There are many vendors that specialize in collecting, parsing, processing, and delivering data. If the data is simple, vendors may provide only the raw data they have collected, such as price and volume. Sometimes vendors do parsing and processing before providing data to their clients; fundamental data is an example. For unstructured yet sophisticated data, such as news, Twitter posts, and so on, vendors typically apply natural language processing
techniques to analyze the content of the raw data. They provide machine-readable data to their clients instead of raw data that is only human-readable. Some vendors even sell alpha models directly – this means the data itself is the output of alpha models. The clients need only to load the data and trade according to it. Such alpha models are risky, however, because they may be overfit and/or overcrowded, with many clients of the same vendor trading the same model. To avoid these risks, the users of these models must test them carefully out of sample (OS), after the data is point-in-time, and use them in nontrivial ways.
DATA VALIDATION
When alpha researchers get new data, the first thing they need to do – before checking alpha signals on it – is check the data's usability. In alpha simulation, the data delivery time is a very important factor. Any piece of data is useless if it does not have a timestamp. This is because without knowing the time a data point is created, we cannot effectively chart its progression; essentially, we are using the data blindly. Only with the correct timestamp can we do correct simulations. If we attempt to use the data before it is available, we will have forward-looking bias, which will make the alpha's performance look amazing in simulation but will be unrealizable in live trading. If we do not use the data promptly, the alpha will not perform up to its potential. For example, if Apple's earnings exceeded expectations, its stock price most likely would increase, all other things being equal; the earnings announcement would be a good time to buy. If, however, we waited a week to buy Apple, we would not be able to realize those gains because the good news already would have been priced into the stock. So for every dataset we want to use in alpha research, we need to learn about the data delivery timeline and take care to access the data only
when it is available, to make sure that we do not have forward-looking bias and that we get meaningful simulation results. We also need to ensure that the data can support alpha production – that the data will be generated in the future following a reliable schedule. Sometimes we learn that the data producer will cease to generate the data. In this case, the data is not usable for an alpha because there is no way to get more data in real time.
Another possible problem is survival bias. Even if a data vendor provides an alpha model that performs well when it is tested, this does not mean the model will perform well in the future. That is because we do not know how many models the vendor developed before this single model was selected. If the vendor tried 1,000 models and only one survived, we may face survival bias. The bias is introduced by the vendor and out of our control. In this case, some out-of-sample testing period for the dataset might be useful. Out-of-sample testing is helpful because it is not conducted in a controlled universe and strong performance is a good indicator of an alpha's robustness.
In historical simulations, one bad data point can kill the entire alpha signal. In live production, it is very dangerous to assume that the data always is correct. If the data goes wrong, it can distort the alpha signals and potentially cause significant losses. When using data in alpha design, we always should consider conducting a sanity check. We should do some basic checking, such as removing outliers in the alpha code. These basic safeguards help ensure that our alpha will be more robust.
UNDERSTAND THE DATA BEFORE USING IT
Serious alpha research is based on a deep understanding of the data. For some simple data, just crunching the numbers to create an alpha may be fine. For complicated data, however, a
deep understanding makes an essential difference in alpha research. Sometimes we need to acquire extra knowledge. To understand hundreds of fundamental factors, we need to learn some concepts of corporate finance. Only when we fully comprehend the data can we come up with alpha ideas that will be more robust and more likely to survive.
EMBRACE THE BIG DATA ERA
Nowadays, the available data is growing explosively, in variety, volume, and velocity. In the past, traders might have considered only price–volume and fundamental data in predicting stock price movements. Today there are many more choices, which allow many interesting ideas. Kamstra et al. (2002) presented a “SAD” (seasonal affective disorder) effect: stock market returns vary seasonally with the length of the day. Hirshleifer and Shumway (2003) found that the morning sunshine at a country's leading stock exchange could predict the market index returns that day. Preis et al. (2013) made use of Google trend data to develop an alpha that beat the market significantly: a 326% return versus a 16% return.
A huge amount of data is created every day. Take the US equity market: the Level 1 tick data is about 50 gigabytes per day, and the Level 2 tick data exceeds 100 gigabytes per day. Social media also contribute lots of data, with Twitter users sending out 500 million tweets, on average, every day.
Today, data is created quickly. The latency for high-frequency trading firms can be measured in single-digit microseconds. Data vendors are trying to push the data speed to the limit in hopes of gaining more clients.
More data is always better, as long as we can handle it. It is very challenging to manage the rapid growth of data. There may be cost considerations for storage devices, computing machines, customized databases, and so forth. Yet, if data can be used correctly and efficiently, we can target better alphas.
CONCLUSION
In alpha research, the search for data is always a high priority. Given the many types of data available, it is challenging to find the most suitable data for alpha research, but when we succeed, the rewards can be considerable. One information-rich dataset can inspire many alpha ideas and generate many alphas. A single good data source can make a big difference in the performance of an alpha or a portfolio. Therefore, investment in data searching, data cleaning, and data processing is an important part of alpha creation.
