16
Machine Learning in Alpha Research
By Michael Kozlov
INTRODUCTION
Over the past several decades, machine learning has become a common tool for almost any task that requires information extraction from large datasets. In alpha research, several common problems can be solved using a machine learning methodology:
• Regression problems, in which Y and X are quantitative variables and Y is inferred by a function Y = F(X).
• Classification problems, in which Y is a qualitative variable and inferred from a quantitative variable X.
• Cauterization problems, in which a quantitative variable X is observed and classified into groups with similar features.
In this chapter, we will introduce the most common techniques used to address these problems.
In alpha research, it is not important to describe perfectly what has happened in the past, but it is important to be as precise as possible in predicting the future. Therefore, we are faced with the following dilemma: an overly complex model may enable perfect calibration but lead to overfitting and a poor quality of prediction, whereas an overly simplistic model that fits the sample data very poorly has no chance of predicting future behavior more accurately.
MACHINE LEARNING METHODS
Historically, the field of machine learning received a boost after World War II, when humanity faced a pressing need to analyze a lot of information and make a lot of correct decisions quickly, beyond what would have been possible by relying solely on human common sense and computational abilities. In 1957, Frank Rosenblatt of Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory invented what he called the perceptron, in what is commonly referred to as the beginning of machine learning as a science. The idea was obvious and promising: if the human brain is nothing but an assembly of neurons, we can create an artificial neuron; just like a natural neuron, it would be pretty simple.
The artificial neuron was implemented as the simplest linear classifier of input signals. Each artificial neuron has parameters that can be fit on a set of training examples. A perceptron is an assembly of neurons that may represent a stronger and more complex classifier. The disadvantage of perceptrons is that having too many parameters may lead to overfitting, when positive training results do not have strong predictive power for the new data.
In the 1960s, Soviet scientists Vladimir Vapnik and Alexey Chervonenkis invented the generalized portrait algorithm, which later developed into the family of classification algorithms known as support vector machines (SVMs). The generalized portrait and SVMs were new steps in machine learning. In contrast to the perceptron, with SVMs the solution presumes that the accuracy achieved during training is preserved out of sample and hence prevents overfitting. Let's now briefly review the most important directions and methods in machine learning (see Figure 16.1).
Figure 16.1 The most developed directions of machine learning. The most popular are in black
Supervised and Unsupervised Learning Algorithms
The term “supervised algorithm” means that we expect the machine to train itself from a set of ground-truth examples we provide. For instance, we prepare a set of pictures with the correct labels “cat” and “dog” and expect the machine to train itself to distinguish between them. Another example would be the set of correct results (selected from the past) for a prediction task.
The term “unsupervised algorithm” refers also to cauterization tasks, where we don't know the correct answers in advance. In this case, the machine search is directed only by some predefined quality criterion.
For example, in alpha research the task of predicting stock prices can be a good application of supervised learning, and the task of selecting stocks for inclusion in a portfolio is an application of unsupervised learning.
Statistical Models
Models like naive Bayes, linear discriminant analysis, the hidden Markov model, and logistic regression are good for solving relatively simple problems that do not need high precision of classification or prediction. These methods are easy to implement and not too sensitive to missing data. The disadvantage is that each of these approaches presumes some specific data model.
Trend analysis is an example of applications of statistical models in alpha research. In particular, a hidden Markov model is frequently utilized for that purpose, based on the belief that price movements of the stock market are not totally random. In a statistics framework, the hidden Markov model is a composition of two or more stochastic processes: a hidden Markov chain, which accounts for the temporal variability, and an observable process, which accounts for the spectral variability. In this approach, the pattern of the stock market behavior is determined based on these probability values at a particular time. The goal is to figure out the hidden state sequence given the observation sequence, extract the long-term probability distribution, and identify the current trend relative to that distribution.
Support Vector Machines
A support vector machine is a machine learning algorithm with a strong theoretical basis. It is very robust and has several modifications for various types of problems, but it usually requires a lot of training time and is not the best technique for parallel computations; this is a disadvantage for modern algorithms.
The main idea of SVMs is that, given a set of data points in a vector space classified into two nonoverlapping groups (categories), an SVM algorithm partitions the space into two subsets to maximize the distance between the training points and the boundary. New instances are then mapped into the same space and assigned to the category.
SVMs can be a very useful method for the analysis and prediction of financial time series because they can be formulated in terms of a risk function consisting of the empirical error and a regularized term that is derived from the structural risk minimization principle. A common approach is to use a vector regression (SVR) to solve regression and prediction problems. By varying the margins of the SVR, you can simulate changes in the volatility of the financial data. Furthermore, in an SVR the effects of asymmetrical margins can be taken into account, reducing the downside risk of the model.
Neural Networks
Neural networks (NNs) grew out of the idea to represent the structure of the human brain with artificial neurons very similar to natural ones. It was quickly observed that the key point is not the neuron structure itself but how neurons are connected to one another and how they are trained. So far, there is no theory of how to build an NN for any specific task. In fact, an NN is not a specific algorithm but a specific way to represent algorithms. There is a well-known backpropagation algorithm for training NNs. Neural networks are very efficient, given sufficient computing power. Today they have many applications and play an important role in a number of artificial intelligence systems, including machines that beat human players in chess and Go, determine credit ratings, and detect fraudulent activity on the internet. However, the lack of theory and lack of internal transparency of NNs (whose internal logic is hard to interpret) have somewhat hampered their development.
Ensemble Methods
Ensemble methods, like random forest and AdaBoost, aggregate the solutions of multiple “weak” classifiers or predictors with poor individual accuracy to obtain a stronger classification or a more precise prediction. The random forest algorithm constructs a set of simple decision trees relying on training examples, then makes these trees “vote” to produce the final decision for new cases. AdaBoost (for “adaptive boosting” algorithm) aggregates various “weak” classifiers (albeit with higher than 50% accuracy each) to obtain the final decision as a weighted sum of “weak” decisions. These algorithms are very scalable and good for parallel computations.
Because the main idea of random forest and AdaBoost is to combine rough and moderately inaccurate weak hypotheses to form a very accurate strong one, they frequently are used for portfolio optimization. For example, we can start with a set of relatively weak alphas and construct a stable and well-performing strategy using the random forest and AdaBoost methodologies.
However, strong classifiers learned by random forest and AdaBoost tend to have high error rates. Some improved variants of these algorithms have been proposed recently to reduce the rate of false positives. For example, AsymBoost balances the asymmetric costs of false negatives and false positives somewhat by reweighting the positive and negative samples at each training round. Another alternative is FloatBoost, which incorporates the backtracking mechanism of floating search and repeatedly performs a backtracking to remove unfavorable weak classifiers after a new weak classifier is added by AdaBoost; this ensures a lower error rate and reduced feature set at the cost of about five times longer training time.
Deep Learning
Deep learning (DL) is a popular topic today – and a term that is used to discuss a number of rather distinct things. Some data scientists think DL is just a buzz word or a rebranding of neural networks. The name comes from Canadian scientist Geoffrey Hinton, who created an unsupervised method known as the restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM) for pretraining NNs with a large number of neuron layers. That was meant to improve on the backpropagation training method, but there is no strong evidence that it really was an improvement. Another direction in deep learning is recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and natural language processing. One problem that arises in calibrating RNNs is that the changes in the weights from step to step can become too small or too large. This is called the vanishing gradient problem. These days, the words “deep learning” more often refer to convolutional neural networks (CNNs). The architecture of CNNs was introduced by computer scientists Kunihiko Fukushima, who developed the neocognitron model (feed-forward NN), and Yann LeCun, who modified the backpropagation algorithm for neocognitron training. CNNs require a lot of resources for training, but they can be easily parallelized and therefore are a good candidate for parallel computations.
When applying deep learning, we seek to stack several independent neural network layers that by working together produce better results than the shallow individual structures. There is some evidence that employing deep learning to time-series analysis and forecasting has better results when compared with previously existing techniques. The most popular architecture for time series and forecasting was the deep belief network proposed by Kuremoto et al. (2014).
Fuzzy Logic Methods
In classical logic, every statement is true or false. In real life and human logic, however, this is not always enough; some statements are “likely true,” “indefinite,” “unlikely,” and so forth. In other words, there is a grayscale between yes and no. By allowing machines to operate with such underdefined statements, we can produce what's known as fuzzy logic, which has imprecise inference rules and provides mechanisms to make decisions under a lack of information. Financial analysts are showing an increasing interest in using expert systems and neural networks to model financial processes and market performance. But it's also important to recognize that fuzzy logic methods are gaining popularity in the development of hybridized expert and neural network software systems. In fuzzy expert systems, we attempt to specify fuzzy rules, which allows greater variety in response, depending on the degree of belief built into the decision rules.
CONCLUSION
Certainly, data is one of the most valuable resources in the modern digital world. Machine learning has become a common tool to extract information from large datasets. While science is leaping forward to novel data management frameworks, software solutions, and algorithms to facilitate the usage of this resource, the world itself is exponentially increasing in volume and complexity. Therefore, it is impossible to utilize the entire set of available data for alpha construction purposes without machine learning techniques.