20
Fundamental Analysis and Alpha Research
By Xinye Tang and and Kailin Qi
Along with techniques such as pairs trading, momentum investing, event-driven investing, and news sentiment analysis, fundamental analysis is an important tool used in designing quantitative alphas. By examining relevant economic and financial factors, fundamental analysts attempt to reveal a security's value and determine whether it is undervalued or overvalued. A potentially profitable portfolio can then be constructed by going long the relatively undervalued securities and/or going short the overvalued ones. This chapter introduces the key ideas and data sources used in fundamental analysis, as well as the applications of fundamental analysis in quantitative alpha research.
Fundamental analysis can be applied to a range of financial securities. In the context of stocks, fundamental analysis is defined as techniques to determine a company's intrinsic value by analyzing underlying factors that affect its business and its prospects. Fundamental analysts seek to answer such questions as: is the company's revenue steadily growing? What is the company's ability to pay its debt? Does the company have good profitability as well as high earnings quality? Does the company have enough liquid assets compared with liabilities?
On a broader scale, fundamental analysis refers to the analysis of the economic well-being of a financial entity, not just its price movements. Fundamental analysis can be applied not only to single stocks but to sectors and industries as aggregates or even to the market as a whole. In contrast, technical analysis – another major form of security analysis and an important direction in alpha research – focuses solely on the price and volume movements of securities without concerning itself with the fundamentals of the underlying factors.
Fundamental factors can be either qualitative or quantitative. In alpha research, we primarily look at quantitative factors, which can be measured or expressed in numerical terms. Because financial statements are the standard medium by which a company discloses information regarding its financial performance, the quantitative information extracted from them is often used to design alpha signals. Much empirical accounting research has attempted to discover value-relevant attributes from financial statements in order to enhance fundamental analysis.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
As described in the previous chapter, the four main financial statements are the balance sheet, the income statement, the cash flow statement, and the statement of shareholders' equity. The balance sheet provides a financial snapshot of an organization at a particular point in time. It lists a company's assets and liabilities. Investors can use the balance sheet to derive the company's debt level and relevant financial measures, such as the debt-to-equity ratio, quick ratio, and current ratio, which help them understand the company's debt interest payments, credit rating, and performance compared with the industry average. Red flags, such as a large decrease in reserve accounts or a large increase in inventory or accounts receivable, are also exposed on the balance sheet.
The income statement provides a measure of a company's profitability over a period of time, including earnings or profits and expenses or costs. Earnings before interest can be used as a measure of operational profitability, ignoring any interest burden attributable to debt financing. Because of conservatism in accounting, expense items also might include some costs that are not directly related to goods sold during the current period, while some research and development expenditures might not be shown.
The cash flow statement is an important measure of a company's financial well-being because it shows the change in cash over the year. If the statement shows that the enterprise is not able to generate enough cash to pay its dividends but is keeping the productivity of its capital stock out of cash flow from operations, or that the amount of cash flow from operations is lower than that from investing, it may be an early warning sign of potentially serious debt and future cash flow problems.
Shareholders' equity is the difference between the assets and the liabilities of a company (also known as its net worth) and is listed on the balance sheet. The statement of shareholders' equity shows the change in the equity section of the balance sheet during the given period. Companies typically break out common shares, preferred stock, treasury stock, and retained earnings on the statement of shareholders' equity. Investors often follow business metrics such as paid-in capital, the capital invested in the company when it issued its shares, and retained earnings – the portion of earnings that the corporation has chosen to reinvest in the business – on the shareholders' equity statement. When a company chooses to reinvest in the business rather than pay out dividends, it signals that management believes the stock is undervalued and expects it to grow. However, this signal is easily manipulated because it is under management control.
FINANCIAL STATEMENT ANALYSIS
In-depth analysis of financial statements gives investors insight into a company's current and likely future performance. For example, earnings accruals may be biased by management manipulation. Management may assume that investors see high earnings today as a sign of high earnings coming in the future. In fact, earnings consist of two parts: actual cash flow, which is generated by operations, and accruals, which are calculated and decided by accountants, thus leaving room for manipulation. To analyze the quality of accruals, it is worth looking at a case study conducted by Sloan et al. (2011).
1. Sloan scaled earnings, accruals, and cash flow by total assets to compare companies of different sizes.
2. He then analyzed the relationship between earnings and the quality of accruals. He amassed data on accruals, earnings, and cash flows from sample companies, and ranked them by earnings. Sloan assigned company-years into deciles based on the rank of earnings and calculated the average value of earnings in each decile. Then he tracked the results of earnings for the previous and following five years around the calculated year.
3. Last, he compared the results with a ranked version based on the values of the accruals part of earnings.
Sloan's analysis shows that, based on earnings alone, a company that has high performance this year is expected to continue to have high earnings for several years into the future. After ranking the accruals component, however, the predictability of earnings is worse. The cash flow component is a much more powerful predictor than the accruals component. In other words, when analyzing the future level of earnings, it is better to rely on earnings generated from cash flows than on the accruals.
To gain some understanding of a company's value and financial performance, you can analyze the valuation ratios, which are mathematical calculations using figures mainly from the financial statements. Some of the most well-known valuation ratios are price-to-earnings and price-to-book. Some empirical research indicates that factors related to contemporaneous changes in many financial statement ratios can yield significant abnormal returns.
Relevant information outside the standard format of financial statements is submitted in the form of footnotes. Footnotes disclose critical content to help investors get a better view of a company and make informed decisions. Details on matters such as accounting policy, changes in accounting methods, long-term purchase commitments, pending or imminent litigation, and executives' stock options can be found there. Companies hardly ever expose their mistakes or difficulties in headlines or tables, so reading between the lines of these disclosures can give diligent investors an advantage. In some cases, companies use financial disclosures to hide the fact and the effect of changing accounting rules, which might hurt stock prices. Empirically, when there are many new footnotes in financial reports, some red flags may be buried in the long paragraphs. If the footnotes do not appear meaningful, chances are the company is being intentionally obscure. The ability to detect early warning signs in the footnotes of financial reports sets elite investors apart from average ones. Because the footnotes appear as unstructured text, the advanced alpha researcher must find or develop appropriate text-mining systems to convert them to usable signals. Though this step adds to the difficulty of utilizing such data, it provides an opportunity to extract uncorrelated signals.
Alpha researchers also see quarterly conference calls as a tool for corporate disclosure. While financial statements give insight into a company's past performance, conference calls give investors both an idea of the current situation and management's expectations for future performance. Some commentators would say that investors can gather critical information for long-term models, as well as technical indicators, from the tone and manner of the CEO and CFO, especially in the question-and-answer part of the conference call – when, say, they are explaining significant deviations in performance from previous estimates. Empirical evidence shows that the sentiment of the conference call can predict earnings surprises in the following 60 trading days. Analyst interest – those researchers who participate in the call but do not cover the company – is an early indicator of the company's future fundamentals and is positively correlated with stock returns over the next three months (Jung et al. 2015). Investors respond strongly to extreme words and phrases in the earnings call, with significantly higher abnormal trading volume and stock returns after the call (Bochkay et al. 2016). When the number of questions asked during the Q&A section is far below expectations, the next-day abnormal return is lower (Chen et al. 2016). Surprises in the linguistic tone (the relative frequency of negative and positive words) tend to move stock prices (Druz et al. 2016).
Macroeconomic variables can also be used as powerful and fundamental stock price indicators for particular industries – for example, the correlation between oil prices and stock prices in the transportation industry or interest rates in financial services.
Analyst reports produced by investment banks and brokerage firms – the sell side – are another potentially useful information source for investors. These reports analyze business prospects and build valuation models using past and present fundamental information on a specific company and its relevant industry; their price and earnings targets, comments, ratings, and recommendations can be meaningful components of alphas. Because large institutional investors often refer to sell-side reports and can move markets thanks to the volume of assets they manage, analysts' views can be self-fulfilling in the short term even if they are not accurate in the long term. Analyst research also serves as context for any subsequent fundamental announcements because the market has already priced in sell-side expectations; the “surprise” difference between the consensus prediction and the actual announcement is often more meaningful than the fundamentals themselves.
Because of the infrequency with which fundamental data is updated, fundamental alpha signals have lower trading turnover and lower stock coverage than other signals, such as price–volume-based alphas. On the other hand, fundamental information tends to be reflected in stock prices over a longer period of time. The cumulative returns to the fundamental signals usually concentrate around the subsequent earnings announcement and level off one year after the signal's disclosure, indicating that a large percentage of abnormal returns can be attributed to previous years' earnings changes.
Fundamental analysis can give researchers ideas on alternative stock classifications. For example, stocks can be labeled as either value or growth, based on the company's financial performance. Value stocks refer to those at relatively low prices, as indicated by low price-to-earnings, price-to-book, and price-to-sales ratios, and high dividend yields. Growth stocks refer to just the opposite: high price-to-earnings, price-to-book, and price-to-sales ratios, and low dividend yields. Similarly, investors can generate classifications by using other fundamental factors differentiating one type of stock from another. These kinds of classifications allow investors to more accurately observe the market behavior of different groups of stocks and thus design better alpha signals.
CONCLUSION
Growing evidence in both academic and industrial research shows that the application of fundamental analysis can potentially yield significant excess returns. Information extracted from the data sources mentioned in this chapter, such as financial statements, conference calls, and sell-side analyst reports, has historically displayed strong power to predict future stock returns. Quantitative alpha researchers utilize this information to build their fundamental alphas and seek to create portfolios with low turnover and stable profits.