18
Equity Price and Volume
By Cong Li and Huaiyu Zhou
INTRODUCTION
In finance, the efficient market hypothesis (EMH) asserts that financial markets are “information efficient.” That is, with the information available at the time that the investment is made, one cannot consistently achieve returns in excess of average market returns on a risk-adjusted basis.
There are three major versions of the EMH: the weak, the semistrong, and the strong. The weak hypothesis states that the prices of traded assets (for example, stocks, bonds, or property) already reflect all past available public information. The semistrong hypothesis argues that all past publicly available information and current public information already has been priced into securities. The strong hypothesis declares that all public and private information is reflected in a security's price. Thus, given only the current and historical price–volume data, the EMH implies that it is impossible to make a profit in an efficient market and that there are no such things as price–volume alphas.
Is this true? No, it is not. Although the development of information technology, information processing, and automatic trading, in addition to other advances have brought the market closer to full efficiency, full efficiency has not, and may never be, attained. Quantitative traders seek to profit from remaining inefficiencies. Price–volume alphas, relying only on the market data, continue to refute the EMH every day.
SEEKING PROFITS THROUGH PRICE AND VOLUME
Trading Frequencies
Price–volume alphas can seek profits from trading at different rebalancing frequencies. Unlike some long-term investors who balance their positions once a quarter, active portfolio managers typically trade more frequently. They may rebalance their portfolios daily – and sometimes multiple times a day. The more often they trade, the more likely their performance will be statistically significant. The mean of N random variables drawn from independent and identical Gaussian, or normal, distributions has the same mean but 1/sqrt(N) of the standard deviation of the original distribution. Given the same information coefficient, traded four times more often, we can expect an information ratio (IR) that is two times better. Also, more-frequent trading allows active portfolio managers to target short-lived trading opportunities that will vanish if the portfolio is balanced only monthly or quarterly. In some cases, a specific event will drive the price and volume to abnormally high or low values, causing price–volume anomalies. Only fast-moving traders can react to such anomalies, trade accordingly, and seek to profit when the price reverts to its usual level.
Once costs are taken into account, however, potential profits from such anomalies decrease, and many become nonexistent. Trading costs are highly related to trading frequencies. According to a study by researchers at the University of Rochester (Novy-Marx and Velikov 2015), strategies that turn over their portfolios more than five times per year may lose more than 1% per month on trading costs. There generally is a trade-off between higher IRs and lower trading costs.
Momentum-Reversion
Traders can profit by looking at price and volume in different ways. Instead of considering only individual instruments, it is possible to treat the entire pool of tradable assets as a whole. Looking at a single instrument, we can see technical indicators like the moving average convergence–divergence (MACD), which measures momentum by subtracting the longer-term moving average of prices from the shorter-term one, or the average true range (ATR), a moving average-based measure of volatility (generally over a 14-day horizon). When we look at a portfolio, we see different things, such as the interrelationships of the instruments, their co-movement as a group, and instruments that appear temporarily or permanently as outliers compared with the others. It is possible to apply global optimization and group risk neutralization across the whole group.
One interesting phenomenon is the momentum-reversion effect. Single instruments usually exhibit momentum. Assets tend to follow their historical trends – stronger or weaker assets tend to continue being stronger or weaker for a certain time period – so an investor can attempt to profit by following the trend. However, within a sufficiently correlated group of stocks, the picture is quite different. For example, within an industry or subindustry, stronger stocks usually will revert to being weaker in the near future.
Furthermore, the presence of a momentum-reversion effect depends on the time horizon. In general, prices tend to revert to the mean over short periods, such as intraday or daily horizons, but they tend to follow the trend over longer horizons of weeks or months. Here are two different strategies based on the S&P 500 index.
The first is an intraday mean-reversion strategy based on the previous day's high and low levels. When the previous day's price is down and the range (high–low) exceeds a given threshold, the strategy will buy the previous day's low and sell at the end of the day, with no stop-loss or profit target. The rationale is that days with higher intraday volatility will see stronger mean reversion and volatility is usually higher in bear markets.
Trend-following, or momentum, strategies work on a longer horizon. Here are some sample strategies (Clare et al. 2013):
• Strategy 1 (simple daily moving averages): a buy signal occurs when the S&P 500's value moves above the average price of a reasonable time window (250 days or 500 days).
• Strategy 2 (moving average crossovers): a buy signal occurs when the shorter-duration average of the S&P 500's value moves above the longer-duration average.
• Strategy 3 (breakout rules): a buy signal occurs when the S&P 500's value trades at an “x-day” high.
Simulating the strategies above using data from July 1988 to June 2011 shows that they outperform the market, with annualized returns ranging from 10.5% to 11.6% and Sharpe ratios ranging from 0.54 to 0.62.
Integer Effect
Psychological factors also can be sources of price–volume alphas. When human traders (as opposed to computers) plan to buy Apple (AAPL) shares, they tend to issue orders like “BUY N shares with limit price of 100 USD.” Humans are less likely to input orders like “SELL AAPL with limit price of 155.29 USD.” Round numbers (integers, tens, or hundreds) attract a lot more attention from human traders, and this can be targeted in designing alphas. Another example is that people look at price movements asymmetrically: most people care less about a 1% rise in their holdings than a corresponding 1% loss. Furthermore, people tend to hold their losing positions too long and sell their winning positions too soon. By studying such psychological factors, quant researchers can find price trading signals.
Price–Volume with Other Types of Data
Price–volume data has great predictive power when combined with other types of data, especially firmwide events. A particularly significant price or volume movement often is a reflection of a known or unknown market event that likely will have a further impact on market sentiment over time. For example, an empirical study shows that predictable increases in volume lead to predictable increases in prices when quarterly earnings announcements generate substantial volume shocks, which leads to predictable subsequent returns (Frazzini and Lamont 2007). A strategy of buying the stock of every company expected to announce earnings over the next month and shorting stocks not expected to make an announcement generates in testing excess average annual returns of 7–18%. The effect is especially strong for large-cap securities. The study has a relatively long in-sample period, from 1927–2004, showing that the result is robust over different market regimes.
CONCLUSION
The simple examples discussed in this chapter show that price–volume strategies can be viable. Many other types of signals can be extracted from price–volume data, such as market sentiment and the average buy price of different investors. Technical indicators are designed to describe these kinds of information and may help investors better understand and predict stock price movements.
In the finance industry, it is important to trade unique models that have not already been arbitraged away by other market participants. Each trader cherishes his or her models and keeps them well hidden. A model is valuable only when it has limited exposure. Once it becomes public, its predictive power diminishes and soon disappears (occasionally reappearing years later, after it has been forgotten). The market is also evolving; old models decay as new ones emerge. The constant search for new models is the key to why some firms can survive in this business. There are almost unlimited ways to use simple equity price and volume data in quantitative finance.