7
Turnover
By Pratik Patel
We generally measure the accuracy and quality of an alpha's predictions by metrics such as the information ratio (IR) and the information coefficient (IC). The IR is the ratio of excess returns over a benchmark to the variability of those returns; the idea behind it is that an alpha with high excess returns and low variability consistently predicts future returns over a given time period. The IC measures the correlation between the predicted and actual values, in which a value of 1.0 represents perfect forecasting ability.
In the context of evaluating the strength of an alpha, a high IR and a high IC are obviously desirable, but we usually measure an alpha's return prediction ability irrespective of real-world constraints. We assume liquidity is endless, trading is free, and there are no other market participants but ourselves. However, as actual trading strategies must abide by certain constraints, an alpha that often makes predictions correctly will be more easily leveraged if it also satisfies reasonable assumptions about market conditions.
ALPHA HORIZON
Predictions change as new information becomes available. Whether a stock moved one tick, an analyst revised his recommendation, or a company released earnings, this change in information can be a catalyst for trading activity. We measure this trading via turnover: the total value traded divided by the total value held. A company's stock price changes much more often than its earnings per share, so it follows that an alpha based on price movements (e.g. price reversion) will usually have a higher turnover than an alpha based solely on company fundamentals. Because more trading opportunities provide more opportunities to capture
returns, we typically find the IR and IC tend to be higher for price-movement alphas than for fundamental alphas.
More specifically, the turnover of an alpha is related to its prediction horizon – that is, the amount of time in the future for which the price movement is being predicted. For example, an alpha with a horizon of five days aims to predict the price movement from now until five days from now. We find that the longer the horizon, the greater the uncertainty; a meteorologist can predict the weather tomorrow much more accurately than the weather two months from now, and we can predict what we will be doing next week better than what we will be doing at this time next year. The ability to take advantage of rapidly changing information and react accordingly typically increases the quality of the prediction.
Similarly, in alpha research we expect a higher-turnover alpha with a shorter forecast horizon to have better predictive power than a lower-turnover, longer-term alpha. However, it is also clear that execution time becomes a constraint as the horizon becomes shorter. A trader using an alpha with a five-day horizon would need to trade into the position today and trade out of it five days later to fully capture this price movement. In comparison, an alpha with a horizon of three months allows for a much longer time between trades to capture the price movement, resulting in fewer trades and lower turnover over the same time period.
For very short-term alphas (e.g. seconds to minutes), it may even be necessary to cross the spread to get into the desired position, incurring high transaction costs. With their longer execution times, longer-horizon alphas allow better execution optimization, as well as higher capital capacity. It is possible to invest more capital in the alphas before the profits are outweighed by the market impact costs.
THE COST OF A TRADE
Every trade has a cost. When buying a stock, we not only pay a commission to the broker, we also pay a spread cost. The highest price a buyer is offering for a stock (the bid) is usually below the lowest price a seller is willing to accept (the ask); this is the bid–ask spread. To realize a positive return, you must sell what you bought at a higher price than you purchased it at, or, in the case of a short trade, buy back the borrowed shares at a lower price than you sold them at.
We expect these costs to be proportional to the liquidity of the universe or market in question. Spreads are kept tight in liquid markets because there is plenty of interest from buyers and sellers at any point in time; when a buyer crosses the spread to move the bid price up, a seller is typically readily available to take advantage of the favorable price move and bring the ask price back down. On the other hand, when liquidity is low or investor interest piles up on one side, prices are more easily moved, increasing volatility and widening the spread. The top 500 most liquid stocks in the US equity market have an average spread of about 5 basis points (bps). In comparison, smaller markets, like those in Southeast Asia, may have average spreads as wide as 25–30 bps.1 Clearly, the cost of trading is much higher in these markets, so it becomes more important to understand whether the alpha's horizon and turnover profile are suitable for the market. An argument can be made that these markets are less efficient (i.e. have higher volatility), leaving larger opportunities for return, and this is certainly true as long as the return of the alpha justifies the cost of its trading.
When we charge trading costs to alphas, we will likely see that longer-horizon alphas have lower overall trading costs than shorter-horizon alphas. Moreover, it's possible that the lower trading cost of a longer-horizon alpha may also improve its overall performance compared with a shorter-
horizon alpha, even though the opposite may be true before costs. The picture can look very different once real-world constraints are imposed, so it is beneficial to be mindful of this during the research process.
To illustrate this effect in the context of alpha construction, consider two hypothetical alphas that use price and volume data to predict prices on the following day. Both alphas operate on the same set of instruments, and let us assume that both alphas have the same return and IR. The first invests in instruments based on their recent volatility, while the second invests based on their current market volume.

α1 = std(returns)
α2 = log(volume)

We see that the first alpha is investing in more-volatile instruments, but as high-volatility stocks tend to have lower volume and wider spreads, it is difficult for a strategy to allocate a large amount of capital given the challenge in turning those returns into actual profits. The second alpha, meanwhile, is investing in more-liquid large-cap instruments and is likely to perform better when subjected to more-realistic trading assumptions. If we also pretend that volume data is more stable over time relative to volatility, we would expect turnover for the second alpha to be lower, further increasing its appeal.
THE CROSSING EFFECT
So should we only look at after-cost performance when evaluating alphas? Why even bother with evaluating alphas before cost? Just charge trading costs on all alphas and the problem is solved, right? Unfortunately, it's not that simple. Typically, an individual alpha is too weak and unlikely to perform well as a strategy on its own; to build a potentially
profitable trading strategy, a portfolio manager generally needs to combine multiple alphas. Combining many diverse alphas results in a stronger, more informed prediction that is more likely to overcome transaction costs and other trading constraints. A diverse alpha pool requires diverse ideas, methods, and data, resulting in alphas with a wide range of turnover profiles. To put it another way: there is diversity in alpha turnover. Alphas with different horizons are likely taking into account different types of information, and this may result in lower correlations.
When alphas are combined in a single strategy, the alphas' opposing trades “cross.” Consider an alpha that is looking to buy 200 shares of IBM and is combined with another that has a contrarian view and suggests selling 300 shares of IBM. Assuming both alphas have equal weights of 1, the resulting combined alpha will sell 100 IBM shares. Two hundred shares of IBM “cross” and no transaction costs are incurred; the trade never goes out to the market and is therefore cost-free. Costs are incurred only on the 100 shares that the combined alpha will be trading.
If there is adequate crossing among a set of alphas, the turnover and overall trading costs of the resulting combined alpha may be lower than the turnover and trading costs of the individual alphas. In this way, we can still make use of higher-turnover alphas to increase prediction power while keeping trading costs under control. Although charging trading costs on the individual alphas and seeing how those alphas perform would be a viable test, making this a strict requirement would be overly restrictive. With the understanding that turnover should still be controlled on the individual alphas, their after-cost performance is less meaningful if their contributions to the combined alpha performance are significantly better due to this crossing
effect.
CONTROLLING TURNOVER
Information is changing all the time, but (1) not all types of information change at the same rate, and (2) not all information is particularly useful. For the sake of illustration, let us assume that our alpha signal is just the underlying data, with no special transformations, i.e.

α = data

The data is the prediction, and it is clear that the data frequency drives the alpha's turnover: The more the data changes, the higher the turnover.
At one extreme, suppose our data is the daily price of each stock. We will buy if the price previously went up and we will sell if it previously went down. Prices change on almost every executed trade, so we can expect our alpha to have very high turnover. But we understand that most of the trades in the market are inconsequential and we will likely be trading a lot more than we'd like. As a result, it's very likely that our alpha will lose money, on average.
Quarterly company announcements, meanwhile, occur only a handful of times per year, and an alpha making its predictions based solely on this data will naturally have few trading opportunities and low turnover. But this data is inherently sparse. If we do not pay any attention to this fact, plotting the daily turnover of the alpha may show spikes of trading activity around these quarterly events. This suggests that the alpha may be trading into the position very quickly and potentially trading out too soon. We understand that such an alpha has a longer horizon, so such trading spikes may be suboptimal. Thus, even naturally low-turnover alphas may have room for improvement by smoothing the data and spreading out the trading over a longer period. Entire books
can be written on this subject alone, but here are some simple methods that may be used to change turnover profiles:
1. Trade less. Reduce trading by only taking positions on the most confident signals. To this end, using thresholds or truncating the signal serves to trade mostly on the extremes. This filters out the smaller signals that tend to be noisier and may needlessly increase turnover.
2. Smooth the signal. There are a variety of ways to do this, ranging from using moving averages to using sophisticated decay methodologies. One might even argue that this actually changes the alpha itself: By altering the profile of the signal, we may be shifting the focus to a completely different type of information. For example, averaging the five-day returns over a year would give us more information about the medium-to-longer-term trend rather than the short-term reversion. However, the purpose of this operation is to reduce the noise from daily changes and effectively slow the alpha.
3. Incorporate other factors. Alpha research is an iterative process. Rarely is the initial idea the final result. In the second example, volume data was more stable over time than volatility data; therefore, one way to reduce the turnover of the first alpha would be to incorporate elements of the second alpha by using volume data. This may decrease turnover by putting more weight on the more stable factor. Alternatively, dividing the alpha signal by another factor's signal might scale the values up and down, but it leaves their signs unchanged, thereby altering the number of shares we trade at every step without affecting the direction.
CONCLUSION
When researching alphas, we try to extract useful information that correlates with future asset returns while reducing noise. Fast-changing information will result in higher turnover, whereas more stable information will result in lower turnover. While a low-turnover, long-horizon alpha is theoretically preferred for practical trading, high-turnover alphas are an important source of diversification for alpha-driven quantitative trading strategies. Alpha designers should always be conscious of the data they are working with and consider the aforementioned tools for refining their alphas to achieve their targeted turnover profile.
NOTE
1 World Bank, 2013, “The Cost of Equity in Emerging Markets.”
