9
Backtest – Signal or Overfitting?
By Zhuangxi Fang and and Peng Yan
INTRODUCTION
Over the past decade, quite a few quant funds have gained tremendous success in the financial markets through their alpha portfolios. But does that mean an alpha can effectively predict stock prices? More specifically, can quants predict the price of a given stock on a given date in the future?
Unfortunately, we probably cannot make single predictions with any reasonable confidence. It is the nature of statistical arbitrage that prediction is possible only in a “statistical” sense: only over a large number of predictions do random errors average out to a usable level of accuracy in the aggregate. More interestingly, there are many ways of making such statistical price predictions.
STATISTICAL ARBITRAGE
The key underlying assumption of statistical arbitrage is that the prices of financial instruments are driven by consistent rules, which can be discovered from their historical behavior and applied to the future. The prices of financial instruments are influenced by multiple factors, including trading microstructures, fundamental valuation, and investor psychology. Therefore, it is to be expected that various kinds of price-driving rules can be discovered and used to create alphas. As the prices of securities are determined by multiple rules, or factors, not every rule will apply to any particular instrument at any given moment.
A real price-driving rule – and a good alpha based on this rule – should appear to be predictive with statistical significance when applied to the collection of all investigated securities over all available trading days. A simple example is the well-known mean-reversion rule, which states that a stock's price will tend to revert to its average price over time. Within a stock market, it is still easy to find stocks whose prices keep going up or down in some periods, with the average price consistently trending in a particular direction. Yet aggregating over a collection of N stocks over M trading days, if N and M are sufficiently large, you will find more than 50% of these N × M sample points obeying the mean-reverting rule. Furthermore, even though they are based on the same underlying price-driving rule, different alphas can be created as long as they use different implementations of the rule. For example, to take advantage of the mean-reversion rule, using a variety of methods to calculate the mean and diverse ways to define the tendency of reversion could result in different alphas, all of which could be profitable and relatively uncorrelated. It is important to distinguish between the essential constraints that define an idea and specific implementation choices. Consider the wheel. Wheels are commonly round, but why do they have to be round? The real restriction on the shape of a wheel is that it must be convex and planar, with constant width. Under this rule, it is possible to make wheels in shapes other than round, as explained by the theory of the Reuleaux triangle. Because different implementations often have different strengths and weaknesses, a good ensemble of implementations is generally more robust than any individual instance.
BACKTESTING
There are two basic ways of generating signals: through ideas or through data. In the idea-driven process, the seed of an alpha design idea can be a hypothesis, a paper, a story, an inspiration, or just a random idea. In the data-driven process, signals come from datasets collected in-house or from data providers, but any potentially valuable signals found must be verified. Most research follows some form of hybrid methodology: an initial idea is revised based on the data, or a new data source motivates a new direction of reading and research. For both methodologies, backtesting is a critical component of the process.
As in academic research, many assumptions are wrong and many trials futile. Only a few of them have the potential to generate consistent profits in the real environment. In many cases, a researcher will have a strong belief that a model will work but will find after testing that it does not – or, conversely, the initially skeptical researcher may find great empirical value in an idea discovered by serendipity or a contrarian hypothesis. The underlying force may be present in the market but have a weak effect that is outweighed by other factors, or the initial idea may simply be wrong because markets often behave counterintuitively.
Simulation and Backtesting
There are many possible methods to test the validity of a hypothesis, including:
• A Monte Carlo simulation, which simulates the various sources of uncertainty that are affecting instrument values to get a range of resultant outcomes.
• Pricing models, which calculate asset prices (for example, the Black–Scholes options pricing model).
• Explanatory models, which analyze what happened historically.
In our working environment, simulation means backtesting: the process of applying a specific model to unbiased historical data under certain market assumptions and risk constraints to test its simulated historical performance. The implicit assumption of backtesting is that if the idea worked in history, then it is more likely to work in the future. A model will generally not be considered unless it has been validated in simulation.
Backtesting results are used for preselecting models, comparing different models, and judging the potential value of such alphas. These results can be assessed using various measures, such as returns, Sharpe ratio (return over risk), turnover (trading frequency), and correlation with other alphas.
Good backtesting results are not sufficient for a profitable strategy, however; many other factors will affect investment performance. As a general matter, investors should not invest capital based solely on backtesting simulation results. Some of the reasons are:
• The current market may not be the same as the historical period. Market rules are always changing, the balance of market participants shifts over time, and new theories and new technologies can affect market behavior.
• The assumptions behind the simulation may not be realistic. To buy or sell assets, investors must execute trades that may affect the market, and they need to pay transaction costs or commissions. Reasonable estimates for those numbers are crucial when evaluating a simulation result.
• There could be possible forward-looking bias. If you saw someone following a trend and making a profit last year, you might think to test a trend-following model, and perhaps you could get a good historical simulation over the same year. Without a better understanding, you might or might not make a profit in future investments.
• It could be a case of overfitting. Sometimes investors see good simulation results that are simply due to random chance and have no predictive power.
OVERFITTING
The word “overfitting” comes from the statistical machine learning field. In the quant world, overfitting, or the apparent discovery of a price-driving rule that turns out to be incorrect, is an inherent risk in any backtesting framework. A spurious relationship may appear to be statistically significant in the historical data on which it was developed, then disappear in the future and never show up again. An alpha such as “Stocks with the letter ‘C’ in their tickers tend to rise on Wednesdays” is probably not a good one to invest in – even if it appears to have been profitable in the past.
This kind of phenomenon is frequently seen in a field closer to everyday life. An apparent “3,964” formula was discovered before the 2006 World Cup soccer competition. Argentina had won the championship in 1978 and 1986, years that added up to 3,964; Germany won in 1974 and 1990, which added up to the same number; Brazil won in 1970 and 1994, and again in 1962 and 2002. This formula looked beautiful until “statisticians” tried to use it to predict the 2006 championship. They contended that the World Cup would go to Brazil, which had won in 1958 – but it went to Italy instead. Not surprisingly, the “rule” also failed in 2010, when Spain became a new member of the champions' club. But instead of simply laughing at this false alpha, we can learn something sensible: among all the national teams, those that have won the championship tend to be more powerful than their rivals, so they may have a higher chance of winning again. The lesson is that purely playing with numbers may help you find some significant results, but to create good alphas it is important to recognize the underlying price-driving principle and separate it from spurious noise.
Every day, professional investors run huge numbers of simulations on historical data to seek patterns of price moves, using supercomputers, clusters, and now the cloud. The risk of overfitting, or the discovery of spurious relationships, is especially high given the enormous computational power of modern graphics-processing units. When you see especially good simulation results, you need to be careful to evaluate the overfitting risk of the models.
Suppose that a researcher is looking to identify at least one two-year-long backtesting period with an annualized Sharpe ratio higher than 1. If he tries enough strategy configurations, he will eventually find one even if the strategies are actually random, with an expected out-of-sample Sharpe ratio of 0. By trying a large enough number of strategy configurations, a backtest can always be fitted to any desired performance for a fixed sample length.
A signal can be defined as a strategy configuration whose last M days' daily PnL Sharpe ratio was higher than S. In Table 9.1, a minimal Sharpe requirement runs across the top and the number of random simulations within which one can expect to see a signal satisfying the requirement runs down the left column. The numbers are generated by: (1) randomly produced 1 billion-length M normalized distribution vectors; (2) checking how many of such random tries have absolute Sharpe ratios higher than S (if one signal has a very negative ratio, it can be flipped); and (3) calculating the expected number of simulations needed by dividing 1 billion by the number observed in no. 2.
Table 9.1 The number of backtest days required to meet various Sharpe ratio targets
TargetSharpe
No. of days 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
20 1.12 1.27 1.46 1.70 2.00 2.38
60 1.24 1.59 2.12 2.97 4.32 6.58
120 1.37 2.03 3.28 5.82 11.31 24.14
250 1.61 3.11 7.29 20.87 73.45 317.53
500 2.07 6.25 28.34 196.60 2,104.14 34,698.13
1,000 3.13 21.39 345.77 13,700.13 1,340,483 500,000,000
HOW TO AVOID OVERFITTING
To reduce overfitting risks, multiple technologies have been proposed, such as ten fold cross-validation, regularization, and prior probability. Tenfold cross-validation is a process that breaks the data into ten sets of size n/10, trains the model on nine datasets, and tests on one, then repeats the process ten times and takes the mean accuracy. In statistics and machine learning, regularization is used in model selection to prevent overfitting by penalizing models with extreme parameter values. Recently, papers have been published on overfitting issues in the quantitative investment field, including Bailey et al. (2014a), Bailey et al. (2014b), Beaudan (2013), Burns (2006), Harvey et al. (2014), Lopez de Prado (2013), and Schorfheide and Wolpin (2012).
Borrowing concepts from the statistical machine learning field, here are some specific guidelines on how to avoid overfitting:
• Test out of sample: To evaluate an alpha model, an out-of-sample test needs to be a true out-of-sample test. That is, we build a model, test it daily in a real environment, and monitor how it performs. It is not a true out-of-sample test if (1) models are backtested based on the most recent N years' data, then data from an earlier N year period is used as out-of-sample data; or (2) the model is backtested on a subset of the trading instruments and other instruments are used as out of sample. In the first case, the market history of the recent N years was influenced by prior history, so models that worked recently may also tend to work in that history. In the second case, different instruments are correlated; models with good performance in one universe tend to perform well in another.
Note: as the number of alphas being tested out of sample increases, the out-of-sample test becomes more biased. An alpha can perform randomly well due to luck. Out-of-sample performance at the single-alpha level is inadequate when many alphas are tested.
• Increase the in-sample Sharpe ratio requirement: A higher Sharpe ratio reduces the risk of overfitting. If possible, it is better to test the model on a wider universe, where it should have a higher Sharpe, following the fundamental law of Sharpe ratios: the information ratio equals the information coefficient times the square root of breadth (Grinold and Kahn 1999). In the real world, unfortunately, there are often constraints on the total number of relevant tradable instruments or the subset of instruments covered by the dataset.
• Test the model over a longer history: As Table 9.1 shows, lengthening the backtesting period decreases the probability of accidental overfitting. However, longer is not always better because data may not be available for a long enough period or the market may have changed too much for the older history still to be meaningful.
• Cross-validate on different instruments: Good alpha models generally work across assets and regions. For example, equity models developed in the US can be applied to Europe and Asia.
• Make the model elegant: An alpha is better if (1) it is simple and easy to understand; (2) it has a good theory or logic behind it, not just empirical discoveries; and (3) it can be explained and you can tell the story behind it. For example, “Alpha = returns” may have the potential to be a good model, but “Alpha = returns + Δ(volume)” does not. The latter would not work because you cannot meaningfully add two different units (for example, returns use dollars and volume uses a whole number, such as shares).
• Minimize parameters and operations: As in machine learning, models with fewer degrees of freedom are less sensitive to parameter change. This can help reduce the overfitting risks. The added value of spending extra time on fitting parameters or operations is generally small and at a certain point becomes negative as the risk of overfitting outweighs the benefit of the improved fit.
CONCLUSION
The prices of financial instruments are driven by various rules and factors, which can form the basis of statistical arbitrage alphas. All alphas have failure modes, and no alpha works on all instruments under all conditions, but a reasonable combination of real alphas covering different aspects of true price-driving rules is more likely to result in successful profit-generating portfolios. Backtesting is necessary to develop and validate signals, but it runs the risk of overfitting. There are many ways to control the risk of overfitting; the all-encompassing idea is to find robust alphas that work as general principles and are not too sensitive to specific parameters or conditions.
Keep in mind that people glean ideas from academic research papers and sell-side research reports, but these papers and reports describe only good results; they cannot publish if the performance is not good enough. They don't say how many times they have tried, and they don't report failures. In many cases, their models cannot be reproduced.
In addition, financial markets have memory effects. Many quantitative investors are looking at the same historical data. Some patterns occur in history for no discernible reason or for reasons that are outside the scope of what quantitative models can handle. Such patterns can be captured by not just one but a large number of noise models. Trading such highly fitted patterns can push market prices against the model to lose profit, especially at large trade sizes.
