17
Thinking in Algorithms
By Sunny Mahajan
A good quant should be a jack of all trades and, with time and experience, a master of some. Effectively navigating various unexplored landscapes requires skill, care, and the right set of tools to get you to your destination in one piece. With the passage of time and technological progress, we have discovered many new ways of making this journey more quickly and more safely. Manipulating huge swaths of structured as well as unstructured datasets in the hope of making it to that ever-lucrative alpha is no less than an expedition, and algorithms serve as our trusted advisers on these exciting adventures.
To stay competitive, you need to be well equipped and, more importantly, you need to choose the right tool for the job. Even with the right tool, you have to make a decision between finesse and brute force. In predictive modeling, knowing how to walk this fine line makes all the difference. That said, let's take a look at some of the mathematical techniques and algorithms that should be part of your quant tool kit. We will go through the underlying intuition and the practical use cases for these algorithms.
DIGITAL FILTERS
Digital filters perform mathematical operations on discrete time signals to attenuate or amplify certain frequencies. These mathematical transforms are characterized by transfer functions that describe how they respond to various inputs. As such, digital filter design involves expressing performance specifications in the form of a suitable transfer function.
Two classes of digital filters are finite impulse response (FIR) and infinite impulse response (IIR). The key difference between them is that IIR uses feedback and FIR does not. In terms of the type of filtering involved, basic filter types are low-pass filters (which attenuate higher frequencies), high-pass filters (which attenuate lower frequencies), band-pass filters (which keep only a certain band of frequencies), and band-stop filters (which attenuate a band of frequencies). The amplification or attenuation introduced by a filter is called its gain and is a function of signal frequency. By combining the basic filter types, you can end up with the desired transfer function.
One of the most popular applications of digital filters is to smooth time-series data – simple and exponential moving averages are essentially low-pass filters. In addition, the lag introduced by digital filters depends on the transfer function characteristics. As such, with the right digital filter design, it is possible to achieve equivalent or better smoothing with reduced lag, and lower lag is preferable.
Another popular use of digital filters is in time-series decomposition. With a suitable combination of low-pass, band-pass, and high-pass filters, you can effectively decompose the raw time series into its trend and cycle components. With these extracted components, we can design better indicators and trading signals. Once you understand the basics of transfer function modeling, it is easy to design and test custom filters.
In addition to the simple moving average and exponential moving average, it's good to have in your tool kit an effective low-pass filter known as a Butterworth filter. For high-pass filtering, you can just subtract the low-pass filter output from the original time series.
OPTIMIZATION AND LOSS FUNCTION DESIGN
The heart of any optimization problem is selecting an optimal solution from a set of feasible solutions. Feasibility is usually defined by design specifications, production requirements, and manufacturing-process limits. The optimality of a solution is quantified in terms of minimizing a loss function (or a cost function).
The choice of a good loss function differentiates an effective optimization algorithm from an ineffective one and depends on the nature of the problem, as well as the dataset. To illustrate our point, consider the differences between the L1 norm and the L2 norm. The L2 norm squares the individual error terms and heavily penalizes the optimizer for larger error terms. Although this can be desirable when we'd like our solution to have a good performance across the dataset, it can end up being nonrobust in the presence of outliers. On the other hand, the L1 norm formulation is quite robust and generates sparse solutions, but it can be unstable. In practice, this means that many of the error terms end up being zero, while some can be quite large; this does not bode well for our worst-case performance.
Also employed in the form of regularization, the L1 norm and L2 norm have been used successfully to improve performance over ordinary least squares regression. In the classical form, standard regression penalizes the error terms with an L2 norm. However, this often suffers from the problem of unreasonably large and unstable model coefficients, especially in the presence of highly correlated predictors. This can be dealt with by adding an L2 norm penalty on the model coefficients, which penalizes the optimizer for large coefficients (also known as ridge regression or Tikhonov regularization). Additionally, if we know that only a subset of the predictors are actually useful, we can embed that sparsity structure in the learning problem by including an L1 norm penalty on the model coefficients (i.e. a Lasso regression). The Lasso technique has been successfully used as a feature selection strategy in several real-world applications. It's not uncommon to encounter both the problems described above in the same application; this is easily solved by including both the L1 norm and the L2 norm penalties on the model coefficients (i.e. elastic net). This gives us a nice trade-off among performance, robustness, sparsity, and stability.
It is also worth noting that there exists an interesting function called the Huber loss, which uses L2 norm for smaller values of error and switches to L1 norm for error terms exceeding a user-specified threshold. This loss function has the robustness of L1 norm and the stability of L2 norm, and often performs better than either in real-world problems.
Once you understand the basic properties of various loss functions, it is possible to get creative and devise effective solutions for everyday quant problems using optimization.
THE BIAS–VARIANCE TRADE-OFF
In an ideal setup, we would have the perfect learning algorithm trained on sufficient and complete data to build our predictive models. Unfortunately, real-life problems are not so manageable.
The curse of dimensionality implies that with an increasing number of features, we need exponentially more data for our results to be meaningful. To make matters worse, we are faced with the trade-off between information decay and statistical significance. We want to use a large enough data sample to obtain statistically significant results. However, the further we go back in history, the less relevant our data points become, because most real-life problems involve moving targets. The structure and parameters of the model are evolving continuously, and we have only a limited amount of representative data samples from recent history.
To give our learning algorithms a fighting chance, we need to reduce the dimensionality of the problem or embed some prior knowledge of the problem structure in the learning process.
Models with high variance tend to overfit on training data, exhibit high variability in their predictions, and fail to generalize on test data. By reducing the dimensionality of our problem, we limit the degrees of freedom in the learning process.
Models with high bias tend to oversimplify the problem. Although they do not tend to overfit, they suffer from underfitting and have poor performance on both training and test datasets. However, when used in moderation, some relevant assumptions or prior knowledge of the problem structure can help the learning algorithm counter the overfitting problem described above and generate better predictive models.
With awareness of the two extreme ends of this spectrum, let's now discuss the use of dimensionality reduction and shrinkage to effectively manage the bias–variance trade-off.
DIMENSIONALITY REDUCTION
Also commonly referred to as feature extraction, dimensionality reduction deals with the problem of extracting the underlying structure of a dataset by expressing it in terms of a few features that explain most of the variation in the underlying data. As mentioned earlier, this is immensely useful in predictive modeling to counter the effects of the curse of dimensionality.
One of the most commonly used nonparametric dimensionality reduction algorithms in quantitative finance is principal component analysis (PCA). It has been used successfully for building statistical risk models, developing asset allocation algorithms for portfolio construction (principal portfolios), and clustering.
An extension of PCA, sparse principal component analysis (sPCA), adds a sparsity constraint on input variables. In ordinary PCA, the components are usually linear combinations of all input variables; sPCA overcomes this limitation by finding components that contain just a few independent variables. As such, sPCA is often more effective at noise removal than PCA and is useful for feature selection thanks to the baked-in sparsity constraint.
SHRINKAGE ESTIMATORS
When dealing with datasets of high dimensionality and limited data samples, we can often improve upon naive or raw estimators by combining them with some additional information about the problem, usually in the form of a structural estimator. Essentially, shrinkage converts an unbiased raw estimator into an improved biased one.
A very popular and successful application of shrinkage is in improving the estimates of the covariance matrix for asset allocation and risk management. Ledoit and Wolf (2004) demonstrate that by shrinking the sample estimator of the covariance matrix toward a structural estimator (based on the constant correlation model), they are able to construct portfolios that outperform those based on the naive sample estimator of the covariance matrix. The usefulness of shrinkage in improving statistical estimates has stood the test of time.
PARAMETER OPTIMIZATION
The choice of parameters is very important in the out-of-sample performance of quant models. Static parameters do not account for the fact that most problems in finance involve moving targets, and the optimal parameter set is a function of problem characteristics that need not necessarily be static or uniform in the cross section of our trading universe. In many cases, you can do better by using dynamic parameters, which change with time as well as the characteristics of the cross section. Adaptive algorithms can help make parameters dynamic in both dimensions; depending on how this is achieved, there exist two broad flavors of adaptability: rule-based and process-based.
Rule-based adaptive algorithms employ some form of predetermined logic to make parameters dynamic. Such solutions effectively translate the primary parameter optimization problem to secondary parameters, which govern the predetermined logic. An example of this is shifting from a standard moving average period length to an adaptive moving average length, which changes based on some underlying variable such as recent volatility.
Process-based adaptive algorithms treat individual parameters as state variables with some underlying probability distribution and process dynamics. By observing the available data sample and applying Bayesian inference techniques such as Kalman filtering, these parameters are continuously updated over time. In a cross section, this can also be used to shrink our individual estimates to generate more stable parameter estimates.
If properly engineered, these methods can help design more robust models. Keep in mind, however, that with more complexity comes more vulnerability, and you should always ask if the additional performance of your model covers the costs and risk of the additional complexity.
CONCLUSION
The ideas introduced in this chapter do not even begin to scratch the surface, but they can give you a better understanding of how algorithms approach different problems. Being a good quantitative researcher involves having an extensive repertoire of algorithms, as well as a great intuition of which ones work best in what situations. The time invested in understanding these algorithms and their underlying mechanics generally results in significant dividends.